*The Westminster Confession of Faith <westminster.html>*

*An Example of False Christianity* <westminster.html>

<blog12.html>

<http://thegodswrath.blogspot.com/>

/All graphics and images are copyright of A True Church/

Unless otherwise stated, all articles on atruechurch.info are written by
Darwin Fish <darwin.html> and all Scripture quotations are from the NKJV.


    You Think You're Saved, But You're Not!

What a horrifying reality, to think you will enter paradise on the day
of your death, but then, come to find out on that day, you were actually
deceived, and you find yourself in hell <hell.html>. Such is, and will
be, the terror of most who call themselves Christians today (Matthew
7:13-14; Luke 13:24; 2 Peter 2:2). They will find themselves weeping and
gnashing their teeth (e.g. Matthew 8:12; 22:1-14; 25;14-30; Luke 13:28).

All of the religions of the world lead to nowhere but hell. For example,
Protestantism <falseteachershome.html>, Evangelicalism
<paulwasher.html>, Catholicism <catholicism.html>, Mormonism
<mormonism.html>, JW's <jw.html>, Seventh Day Adventism
<adventists.html>, Islam <quran.html>, manmade Judaism (Matthew 15:8-9),
Buddhism, Hinduism, Atheism, etc., all lead to eternal torment. Those
involved in them are "*unbelieving*, . . . *idolaters*" (Revelation
21:8). Every single last one of them reject the truth of the Bible
(Romans 1:18-25), and thus, the Truth of the Bible, God (John 14:6),
will burn them forever in the lake of fire for hating Him so
(Deuteronomy 32:39-41; Revelation 20:11-15).

Therefore, if you are involved with the kind of Christianity that views
Protestantism <heisholygods.html>, or Catholicism <catholicism.html>, or
the Orthodox church <coptic.html>, or the "church of Christ
<churchofchrist.html>," or Billy Graham <graham.html>, or Rick Warren
<http://www.atruechurch.info/rickwarren.html>, or Joel Osteen
<joelosteen.html>, or James Dobson <dobson.html>, or Pat Robertson
<patrobertson.html>, or John MacArthur <macarthur.html>, or Paul Washer
<paulwasher.html>, or Norman Geisler, or Tony Evans <evans.html>, or
Greg Laurie <laurie.html>, or Charles Stanley <stanley.html>, or Chuck
Smith <smith1.html>, or Fred Price
<http://www.atruechurch.info/fredprice.html>, or J. Vernon McGee
<mcgee.html>, or Charles Blake <cogic.html>, or Chuck Swindoll, or Gene
Scott, or Harold Camping (Family Radio), or John Piper, or T. D. Jakes
<jakes.html>, or David Jeremiah <drjeremiah.html>, or Charles Spurgeon
<spurgeon.html>, or Dave Hunt <davehunt.html>, or Marvin J. Rosenthal,
or David W. Cloud <cloud.html>, or Perry F Rockwood <rockwood.html>, or
Neil Anderson, or Robert Schuller <schuller.html>, or Jack Hayford
<hayford.html>, or Benny Hinn <bennyhinn.html>, or Miles McPherson
<miles.html>, or Ray Comfort <raycomfort.html>, or Jim Cobrae
<cobrae.html>, or Ron Luce <atf.html>, or Chuck Colson, or C. S. Lewis,
or Hank Hanegraaff <hank.html>, or Paul Chappell <chappell.html>, or
Steven Anderson <stevenanderson.html>, or any of the like (or any of the
likes on "Christian" TV or radio) as godly, you are not saved. Why?
Because, you are on the broad way (Matthew 7:13; 2 Peter 2:2; 2 Timothy
4:3). You have not the characteristic of Christ's sheep (John 10:5).
And, men such as these are wells without water (2 Peter 2:17).

*I. The Broad Way*

Jesus warned,

    *Enter by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way
    that leads to destruction, and there are many who go in by it.*
    *Because narrow is the gate and difficult is the way which leads to
    life, and there are few who find it. *(Matthew 7:13)

The false teachers mentioned above, and the many like them (2 Timothy
4:3), all teach a broad theological road that supposedly leads to heaven
(e.g. see some of our reports <falseteachershome.html>). False teachers
differ as to how broad this way is, but nonetheless, they all teach a
broad way. As the false teacher Charles Spurgeon put it,

    What is the reason why there are so many [Christian] sects in the
    world? Surely it must be because we don't follow the guidance of the
    Spirit of God. If we followed the Word of God and the will of God in
    all things, we should be very much more alike than we are. I do not
    think that even then we should all run in the same groove, for *the
    road to heaven may be sufficiently wide to have several different
    paths in it*, and yet shall they all be in the same way and in the
    same road. (Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, Vol. 61, p. 514-515,
    Sept., 28, 1870, bold added)

Yes indeed, they are all "in the same way and in the same road." Jesus
called it the "broad" road "that leads to destruction" (Matthew 7:13).

Spurgeon lies and speaks the exact opposite of Christ when he says, "the
road to heaven may be sufficiently wide to have several different paths
in it." Spurgeon believed both Calvinists and Arminians (different
gospels on 5 points!) were on this wide path to heaven (see our report
/Spurgeon, An Ecumenical False Teacher <spurgeon.html>/). He even
believed there would be /*more*/ people in heaven than in hell.

    _I believe there will be more in Heaven than in hell_. If anyone
    asks me why I think so, I answer, because Christ, in everything, is
    to "have the pre-eminence", and I cannot conceive how He could have
    the pre-eminence if there are to be more in the dominions of Satan
    than in Paradise. (/C. H. Spurgeon's Autobiography/, Vol. 1, p. 171,
    in "A Defence Of Calvinism," underlining added)

Jesus says it's narrow. Spurgeon says it's wide. Jesus says few enter
eternal life (Matthew 7:14; Luke 13:24). Spurgeon says many. He taught
the exact opposite of Christ. Such teaching is antichrist, transgressing
the doctrine of Christ (2 John 9), and damning (Revelation 21:8
"unbelieving").

False teachers, like Spurgeon and those mentioned above, teach that
amongst saved Christians there is a wide spectrum of conflicting
doctrines and this manifests itself as differing forms of Christianity
(e.g., see our report on Chuck Smith <smith1.html>, or note Chuck
Colson's book, /The Body/, or C. S. Lewis' book, /Mere Christianity/).
False teachers create this delusion by holding to some form of creed,
creeds, essentials, fundamentals, or core belief that supposedly unifies
all true believers (e.g. see MacArthur's III. Teaching of Scripture
<macwars.html>). If one stays within the bounds of this central belief,
often called "orthodox Christianity," or "historic Christianity" (e.g.
/Christianity In Crisis/, p. 31, 43), then a person is considered to be
in the truth. And, other doctrines that the Bible addresses are counted
as peripheral issues (or "secondary" or "non-essential") and are
perceived as matters that do not pertain to salvation (e.g. ibid., p.
47). As the phrase that's been attributed to the Catholic of old
(Augustine) puts it,

    In essentials, unity; in nonessentials, liberty; and in all things,
    charity. (/Christianity In Crisis/, by Hank Hanegraaff, copyright
    1993, p. 47)

These words well sum up the broad way (Matthew 7:13). They make room for
many who do not see eye to eye regarding a myriad of Scriptural
subjects. Thus, they create a wide theological path (as Spurgeon said)
that supposedly leads to heaven, but in reality leads to hell; because
people are led to "*not receive the love of the truth*" (as in 2
Thessalonians 2:10).

With this "essentials" doctrine (or any mentality like it), the broad
way (Matthew 7:13-14) breeds complacency like gangrene in the hearts of
men and women. Since there are so many matters in the Scriptures that
are considered not pertinent to salvation, trembling before the word of
God is made obsolete (Psalm 119:120; Isaiah 66:2, 5; Philippians 2:12),
and no one makes haste to keep His commandments (Psalm 119:60). No one
makes haste to keep all His precepts (Psalm 119:128, 151). So, wisdom
cries out,

    *How long, you simple ones, will you love simplicity? For scorners
    delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge.* (Proverbs 1:22)

When "Christians" agree to disagree over what the Bible teaches, and
only the "essential" matters matter (in regards to salvation), there
resides an unbiblical simplicity in the mind and a deadly cancer (2
Timothy 2:16-17) in the hearts of such fools (false Christians) who
learn to scorn and hate knowledge. Because, their perspective is, "Hey,
it's not a matter of salvation." Therefore, their complacency will
destroy them (Proverbs 1:32).

Contrary to any "essentials," Christ said,

    *Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds
    from the mouth of God.* (Matthew 4:4)

Life is had "*by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God"* (i.e.
Genesis to Revelation). It is trust in the word of God that saves, as
James exhorts,

    *Therefore lay aside all filthiness and overflow of wickedness, and
    receive with meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your
    souls. *(James 1:21)

It is the word of God that saves (e.g. Luke 8:11-12). It is the word of
God that must be believed (e.g. Genesis 15:5-6; Romans 4:3). If you are
directed away from faith in the word of God, whatever the issue, this
can lead to the destruction of your soul. Because, Abraham believed God
and it was reckoned to him as righteousness (Genesis 15:5-6; Romans
4:3). If you do not believe God, it will be accounted to you as
wickedness (Psalm 119:118; 1 John 5:10).

Therefore, there are no Biblical issues we can agree to disagree upon,
because Scripture warns and instructs,

    *If anyone teaches otherwise and does not consent to wholesome
    words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine
    which accords with godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but is
    obsessed with disputes and arguments over words, from which come
    envy, strife, reviling, evil suspicions, useless wranglings of men
    of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, who suppose that
    godliness is a means of gain. From such withdraw yourself.* (1
    Timothy 6:3-5)

If anyone teaches anything other than holy writ and does not heed
Scriptural correction ("teaches otherwise and does not consent" 1
Timothy 6:3), then we are instructed to withdraw and turn away from such
a person (1 Timothy 6:5; 2 Timothy 3:5). This is the opposite of
agreeing to disagree. It is rather, agreeing to leave and not fellowship
with them. Because,

    *He who keeps instruction is in the way of life, but he who refuses
    correction goes astray.* (Proverbs 10:17)

Those who go astray from the word of God, are not in the truth, and are
not saved; and their words are words of deceit, as Psalm 119:118 declares,

    *You reject all those who stray from Your statutes, for their deceit
    is falsehood.*

God rejects all those who stray from His word. It does not matter what
the subject matter is. There is no salvation for any who heed not holy
writ, as Psalm 119:21 proclaims,

    *You rebuke the proud, the cursed, who stray from Your commandments.*

No matter who you are, you are cursed if you do not follow after God's
word. Thus, it is eternally important to love correction, as Proverbs
asserts,

    *For the commandment is a lamp, and the law a light; reproofs of
    instruction are the way of life. *(Proverbs 6:23)

    *Cease listening to instruction, my son, and you will stray from the
    words of knowledge. *(Proverbs 19:27)

This is what the false Christian world has done. They have strayed from
the words of knowledge (2 Timothy 4:3; 2 Peter 2:18), and followed after
a broad path that leads to hell (Matthew 7:13-14). In opposition to a
wide path, is the theologically narrow way that leads to life (Matthew
7:13-14; Luke 13:24). How narrow? In the very context in which Christ
warned about the broad way (Matthew 7:13), He ended His sermon with this
warning.

    *Therefore whoever hears these sayings of Mine, and does them, I
    will liken him to a wise man who built his house on the rock: and
    the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on
    that house; and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock. But
    everyone who hears these sayings of Mine, and does not do them, will
    be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand: and the rain
    descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that
    house; and it fell. And great was its fall.* (Matthew 7:24-27)

In the context in which Jesus spoke these words (Matthew 5:3-7:23), He
preached about contriteness, mourning, meekness, hunger, thirst, purity,
peace, persecution, anger, divorce, adultery, oaths, love, giving,
prayer, forgiveness, fasting, possessions, needs, worrying, judging,
rebuking, seeking, false prophets, etc.. Do you see any "non-essentials"
in there? Christ makes no distinction concerning any of the many matters
He addressed in His sermon. For Him, it all matters eternally. Because,
the Lord describes in a very picturesque way, life or death and heaven
or hell for those who hear His words and either do them or do not do
them. Christ placed an eternal importance upon all that He said, as
Proverbs instructs,

    *My son, give attention to my words; incline your ear to my sayings.
    Do not let them depart from your eyes; keep them in the midst of
    your heart; for they are life to those who find them, and health to
    all their flesh.* (Proverbs 4:20-22; see also Proverbs 8:35 & 16:22)

    *My son, let them not depart from your eyes, keep sound wisdom and
    discretion; so they will be life to your soul and grace to your
    neck.* (Proverbs 3:21-22)

Revelation likewise affirms,

    *Blessed are those who do His commandments, that they may have the
    right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the
    city.* (Revelation 22:14)

Those who keep God's word are those who have the right to the tree of
life. In other words, they are the ones who will be granted salvation.
The dividing line between those who are saved and those who are not is
the Bible itself. If someone truly believes in the Scripture, they are
believing in Christ, because Christ is the Scripture (John 1:1, 14;
Galatians 3:8; Hebrews 4:12-13; Revelation 19:13); and they will obey
Him, as John the Baptist said,

    *He who believes in the Son has eternal life; but he who does not
    obey the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
    him.* (John 3:36 NAS, see also 1 John 2:3-5).

Believing in Jesus is identical to believing in and obeying the Bible. 2
John likewise declares,

    *Whoever transgresses and does not abide in the doctrine of Christ
    does not have God. He who abides in the doctrine of Christ has both
    the Father and the Son.* (2 John 9)

The doctrine of Christ is not only what He taught in Matthew 5:3-7:27,
or all the red print in the gospels. The doctrine of Christ equals the
entirety of Scripture (Psalm 119:160). Those who transgress and do not
remain within the bound of holy writ, do not have God. They are not
saved (2 John 9).

There are not many different kinds of true Christianity, as Spurgeon
depicted with his "wide" road with "several different paths in it."
There is only /one/ kind of true Christianity, and it is the kind that
keeps His word (1 John 2:5), all of it (Psalm 119:128, 160, Matthew
4:4). Scripture teaches that true believers believe the same on every
single Biblical doctrine (1 John 4:6, for a more in-depth explanation,
see /The Unity Of The Saints <unity.html>/). There is no agreeing to
disagree, or essentials and non-essentials. The war is over the truth of
the word of God (Genesis to Revelation), and true believers are in
opposition to any and every error that would come against it (Psalm
119:104, 128). As Paul wrote,

    *For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the
    flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty in
    God for pulling down strongholds, casting down arguments and every
    high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing
    every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.* (2
    Corinthians 10:3-5)

Be warned. It only takes one lie to love and practice to keep you
outside the kingdom of God.

    *Blessed are those who do His commandments, that they may have the
    right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the
    city. But outside are dogs and sorcerers and sexually immoral and
    murderers and idolaters, and whoever loves and practices a lie.*
    (Revelation 22:14-15; see also Revelation 21:8)

False teachers, like those mentioned at the beginning of this article,
encourage people not only to love and practice a lie (like the
"essentials" lie), but rather many lies as they divert people's trust
off of God's word and onto their own great sounding words of emptiness
(2 Peter 2:18). The amazing part of this is, the false teachers, being
deceived themselves (2 Timothy 3:13), have people thinking they are
following the Bible, when in reality they are following the doctrines of
men (Matthew 15:8-9), like the "essentials" lie which is a damning
doctrine of men, nowhere taught in the Word of God (Proverbs 30:5-6).

Most people are either pagans, lost in some false religion, or false
Christians caught on the broad way (Matthew 7:13-14; 2 Timothy 4:3).
Most people have not even found the narrow way, the way of truth (2
Peter 2:2). Yet, Christ warns even those who have found the narrow way
with these words:

    *Strive to enter through the narrow gate, for many, I say to you,
    will seek to enter and will not be able. *(Luke 13:24)

Even among those who have actually found the narrow gate, many of them
do not enter. Many go to perdition, as Peter writes,

    *For the time has come for judgment to begin at the house of God;
    and if it begins with us first, what will be the end of those who do
    not obey the gospel of God? Now "If the righteous one is scarcely
    saved, where will the ungodly and the sinner appear?"* (1 Peter 4:17-18)

The righteous make it with difficulty (Matthew 7:14; Acts 14:22). It is
not an easy path.

Therefore, if you follow the typical Christianity that prevails in the
world today, or anything like it, if you are on this broad way, and you
do not reject it (2 Timothy 3:5; Hebrews 12:14), you will lie down in
torment (Isaiah 50:11; 66:24; Revelation 21:8); because you have not
received "*the love of the truth, that* [you]*might be saved*" (2
Thessalonians 2:10); and because,

*II. Christ's Sheep Flee*

Those who have received the love of the truth would not hang around such
broad way "Christianity," because they would know the truth does matter,
and in loving the truth they would "*hate every false way*" (Psalm
119:104, 128, 163), as Proverbs 8:13 says, "*the fear of the Lord is to
hate evil*." False doctrine, on any Biblical matter, is evil (Proverbs
30:5-6).

Note how Jesus describes His sheep. He says they follow Him. They follow
the truth (John 14:6).

    *My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow Me. *(John
    10:27)

Earlier Jesus describes Himself and His sheep by saying,

    *And when he brings out his own sheep, he goes before them; and the
    sheep follow him, for they know his voice. They will by no means
    follow a stranger, but will flee from him, for they do not know the
    voice of strangers.* (John 10:4-5)

Jesus' sheep are those who are saved (John 10:27-28), and they are
described as those who "*will by no means follow a stranger*." This "*by
no means*" dictates that under no circumstances will Christ's sheep
follow a stranger.

Who is a stranger? A stranger is anyone other than Christ whom the sheep
do not know. The context of John 10:5 is false spiritual leaders (John
9:40-41). Christ's sheep hear neither strangers (John 10:5) nor thieves
and robbers (John 10:8). Anyone who would speak so as to divert a person
away from Christ would fit "a stranger," and this is what false teachers
do. "*They speak great swelling words of emptiness*" (2 Peter 2:18), and
bring people into the same bondage and corruption by which they
themselves are held (Luke 6:39-40; 2 Peter 2:19).

Therefore, anyone following any of the men listed at the beginning of
this article, or any like them, are not Christ's sheep. Because the Lord
says, not only will they not follow them, but they "*flee from him*."

Christ's sheep do not hang out with false teachers and false churches.
They flee from those who do not speak the truth ("strangers"). Whether
it is a Catholic church <catholicism.html>, Mormon church
<mormonism.html>, Jehovah's Witness Hall <jw.html>, Muslim mosque
<quran.html>, or any of the myriad of churches on the broad way (like a
"church of Christ <churchofchrist.html>," or Grace Community in Panorama
City, CA <macarthur.html>; or Lancaster Baptist in Lancaster, CA
<chappell.html>, etc.), Christ's sheep are not found counted in their
ranks. The only ones who are found heeding such religion are the wicked,
as Proverbs 17:4 declares,

    *An evildoer gives heed to false lips. *

Evildoers are to be found in these churches, not those who follow Christ
(John 10:5). Therefore, if you are involved in a false church, you prove
yourself to be still lost in your sin. God calls you an evildoer
(Proverbs 17:4), and by His Word identifies you as not one of His own by
the sheer fact that you do not flee such wickedness (John 10:5; 1
Timothy 6:5; 2 Timothy 2:20-21; 3:5; Hebrews 12:14; 13:13).

Someone might argue, "But, the Lord used Billy Graham <graham.html> [or
some other false teacher] to bring me to Christ." This too is a lie,
because false teachers, like those mentioned at the beginning of this
article, are,

*III. Wells Without Water*

Speaking of false teachers, Peter wrote,

    *These are wells without water, clouds carried by a tempest, for
    whom is reserved the blackness of darkness forever.* (2 Peter 2:17)

Peter calls false teachers "*wells without water*." Jude says they are
"*clouds without water*" (Jude 12). What does this mean?

In the Scriptures, water is used to speak of the Spirit of truth (i.e.
the Holy Spirit, John 7:37-39; 14:15-18; 15:26; 16:13), God (Jeremiah
2:13/17:13), and salvation (Isaiah 55:1; Psalm 36:9; John 4:10-14;
Revelation 7:17; 21:6; 22:1,17). Therefore, if false teachers are
without this water, they do not have the Holy Spirit (like in Jude 19).
They are without God (2 John 9), and do not have salvation (2 Peter 2:3,
12-14, 17; Jude 4, 11, 13). As 1 Timothy 6:5 says, they are "*destitute
of the truth"* and know "*nothing*."

The Lord calls them "wells" and "clouds." A well is a hole in the ground
that is supposed to have water, or gives the appearance that it would
have water. A cloud likewise gives the appearance that it carries
moisture. Yet, a well or a cloud without water gives a false impression,
and false teachers do this well. They fool the masses into thinking God
is using them to bring people to Christ, but it is all a Satanic facade
(as in 2 Corinthians 11:13-15). They have no water. They have no truth
(truth mixed with lies = deceit and no truth), no salvation, and no Holy
Spirit. Thus, they do nothing but deceive people. They are as Jesus said,

    *blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind leads the blind, both
    will fall into a ditch*. (Matthew 15:14).

Jesus also said,

    *The thief does not come except to steal, and to kill, and to
    destroy.* (John 10:10a)

This statement is made in the context of "thieves and robbers" (John
10:1, 8). It is not speaking solely of Satan, but rather his ministers
as well (2 Corinthians 11:15; John 10:1). It lets us know the sole
purpose of these charlatans, and that is to deceive (to steal, kill, and
destroy). They steal using "*great swelling words of emptiness*" (2
Peter 2:18). They kill by being used by the devil (1 Peter 5:8) to
divert people away from the words of life (Proverbs 4:20-22; 14:12;
18:21; Philippians 2:16). And they destroy with their "*destructive
heresies*" (2 Peter 2:1). They may not be aware of the depth of their
own evil (e.g. John 16:2-3; 2 Timothy 3:13), but they are nonetheless
"*like natural brute beasts made to be caught and destroyed*" (2 Peter
2:12); and they do destroy others.

If the Lord were to use a false teacher for some good, it would be in
spite of him, not because of him. As the Lord used Balaam the false
prophet to bless Israel (Numbers 22-24), it was not because Balaam was a
godly man or one who lead people to God (Numbers 25:1-9; 31:16; 2 Peter
2:15-16). It was simply because God turned the curse into a blessing
(Deuteronomy 23:5; Nehemiah 13:2). Scripture does not teach that the
Lord uses false teachers to lead people to Christ. On the contrary, the
Word teaches that God uses false teachers to lead people away from
Christ (Psalm 118:22-24; Romans 11:36; 1 Peter 2:7).

False teachers falsely boast of giving the gospel to people. But they
are like the one mentioned in Proverbs 25:14.

    *Whoever falsely boasts of giving is like clouds and wind without rain.*

They are clouds and wells without water, a dry disappointment.

If you are going to "*draw water from the wells of salvation*" (Isaiah
12:3), you need to go where the water is to be found (John 4:10, 13-14).
It is not found with the likes of the men mentioned above. It is not
found in the myriad of false churches and ministries. It is found in the
pages of the Word of God (1 Peter 1:22-23; Hebrews 4:12-13; Revelation
19:13). *Fear God <http://www.atruechurch.info/fearofgod.html>* (Luke
12:4-5), *cry out* (Proverbs 2:3), *weep* (James 4:9), and *seek* for
understanding (Proverbs 2:4) like there is no tomorrow, because for
most, there is no tomorrow (Psalm 9:17; 92:7; Proverbs 1:24-32; Matthew
7:13-14).

    *Strive to enter through the narrow gate, for many, I say to you,
    will seek to enter and will not be able. *(Luke 13:24, see also What
    Must I Do To Be Saved? <whatmustido.html>)

*a true church, P. O. Box 130, Moodys, OK 74444*

*1-800-HOW-TRUE; **www.atruechurch.info* <home.html>

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

