Home <http://slatestarcodex.com/>

  * About <http://slatestarcodex.com/about/>
  * Archives <http://slatestarcodex.com/archives/>
  * Top Posts <http://slatestarcodex.com/top-posts/>
  * Mistakes <http://slatestarcodex.com/mistakes/>
  * Comments <http://slatestarcodex.com/comments/>
  * Predictions & Bets <http://slatestarcodex.com/predictions-bets/>
  * Advertise <http://slatestarcodex.com/advertise/>
  * Amazon <http://slatestarcodex.com/amazon/>
  * Open Thread </tag/open/?latest>

Comments Feed <http://slatestarcodex.com/comments/feed/> RSS Feed
<http://slatestarcodex.com/feed/>	
codex Slate Star Codex <http://slatestarcodex.com/>
Open threads at the Open Thread tab every Sunday and Wednesday


  Considerations On Cost Disease

Posted on February 9, 2017
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/>
by Scott Alexander <http://slatestarcodex.com/author/admin/>	

*I.*

Tyler Cowen writes about cost disease
<https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2017-01-18/this-economic-phenomenon-is-making-government-sick>.
I’d previously heard the term used to refer only to a specific theory of
why costs are increasing, involving labor becoming more efficient in
some areas than others. Cowen seems to use it indiscriminately to refer
to increasing costs in general – which I guess is fine, goodness knows
we need a word for that.

Cowen assumes his readers already understand that cost disease exists. I
don’t know if this is true. My impression is that most people still
don’t know about cost disease, or don’t realize the extent of it. So I
thought I would make the case for the cost disease in the sectors Tyler
mentions – health care and education – plus a couple more.

_First_ let’s look at primary education:

There was some argument about the style of this graph, but as per
Politifact
<http://www.politifact.com/virginia/statements/2015/mar/02/dave-brat/brat-us-school-spending-375-percent-over-30-years-/>
the basic claim is true. Per student spending has increased about 2.5x
in the past forty years even after adjusting for inflation.

At the same time, test scores have stayed relatively stagnant. You can
see the full numbers here
<http://nationsreportcard.gov/ltt_2012/summary.aspx>, but in short, high
school students’ reading scores went from 285 in 1971 to 287 today – a
difference of 0.7%.

There is some heterogenity across races – white students’ test scores
increased 1.4% and minority students’ scores by about 20%. But it is
hard to credit school spending for the minority students’ improvement,
which occurred almost entirely during the period from 1975-1985. School
spending has been on exactly the same trajectory before and after that
time, and in white and minority areas, suggesting that there was
something specific about that decade which improved minority (but not
white) scores. Most likely this was the general improvement in
minorities’ conditions around that time, giving them better nutrition
and a more stable family life. It’s hard to construct a narrative where
it was school spending that did it – and even if it did, note that the
majority of the increase in school spending happened from 1985 on, and
demonstrably helped neither whites /nor/ minorities.

I discuss this phenomenon more here
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/12/02/contra-robinson-on-schooling/> and
here
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/12/04/highlights-from-the-comment-thread-on-school-choice/>,
but the summary is: no, it’s not just because of special ed; no, it’s
not just a factor of how you measure test scores; no, there’s not a
“ceiling effect”. Costs really did more-or-less double without any
concomitant increase in measurable quality.

So, imagine you’re a poor person. White, minority, whatever. Which would
you prefer? Sending your child to a 2016 school? Or sending your child
to a 1975 school, and getting a check for $5,000 every year?

I’m proposing that choice because as far as I can tell that /is/ the
stakes here. 2016 schools have whatever tiny test score advantage they
have over 1975 schools, and cost $5000/year more, inflation adjusted.
That $5000 comes out of the pocket of somebody – either taxpayers, or
other people who could be helped by government programs.

_Second,_ college is even worse:

/Note this is not adjusted for inflation; see link below for adjusted
figures/

Inflation-adjusted cost of a university education was something like
$2000/year in 1980
<https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d07/tables/dt07_320.asp>. Now it’s
closer to $20,000/year. No, it’s not because of decreased government
funding
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/05/opinion/sunday/the-real-reason-college-tuition-costs-so-much.html?_r=0>,
and there are similar trajectories for public and private schools.

I don’t know if there’s an equivalent of “test scores” measuring how
well colleges perform, so just use your best judgment. Do you think that
modern colleges provide $18,000/year greater value than colleges did in
your parents’ day? Would you rather graduate from a modern college, or
graduate from a college more like the one your parents went to, plus get
a check for $72,000?

(or, more realistically, have $72,000 less in student loans to pay off)

Was your parents’ college even noticeably worse than yours? My parents
sometimes talk about their college experience, and it seems to have had
all the relevant features of a college experience. Clubs. Classes.
Professors. Roommates. I might have gotten something extra for my
$72,000, but it’s hard to see what it was.

_Third,_ health care. The graph is starting to look disappointingly
familiar:

The cost of health care has about quintupled since 1970. It’s actually
been rising since earlier than that, but I can’t find a good graph; it
looks like it would have been about $1200 in today’s dollars in 1960,
for an increase of about 800% in those fifty years.

This has had the expected effects. The average 1960 worker spent ten
days’ worth of their yearly paycheck
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/chrisconover/2012/12/22/the-cost-of-health-care-1958-vs-2012/#4785acf6590f>
on health insurance; the average modern worker spends sixty days’ worth
of it, a sixth of their entire earnings.

/Or not./

This time I can’t say with 100% certainty that all this extra spending
has been for nothing. Life expectancy has gone way up since 1960:

/Extra bonus conclusion: the Spanish flu was really bad/

But a lot of people think that life expectancy depends on other things a
lot more than healthcare spending. Sanitation, nutrition, quitting
smoking, plus advances in health technology that don’t involve spending
more money. ACE inhibitors (invented in 1975) are great and probably
increased lifespan a lot, but they cost $20 for a year’s supply and
replaced older drugs that cost about the same amount.

In terms of calculating how much lifespan gain healthcare spending has
produced, we have a couple of options. Start with by country:

Countries like South Korea and Israel have about the same life
expectancy as the US but pay about 25% of what we do. Some people use
this to prove the superiority of centralized government health systems,
although Random Critical Analysis
<https://randomcriticalanalysis.wordpress.com/2016/11/06/us-life-expectancy-is-below-naive-expectations-mostly-because-it-economically-outperforms/>
has an alternative perspective. In any case, it seems very possible to
get the same improving life expectancies as the US without octupling
health care spending.

The Netherlands increased their health budget by a lot around 2000,
sparking a bunch of studies on whether that increased life expectancy or
not. There’s a good meta-analysis here
<http://arno.uvt.nl/show.cgi?fid=130315>, which lists six studies trying
to calculate how much of the change in life expectancy was due to the
large increases in health spending during this period. There’s a broad
range of estimates: 0.3%, 1.8%, 8.0%, 17.2%, 22.1%, 27.5% (I’m taking
their numbers for men; the numbers for women are pretty similar). They
also mention two studies that they did not officially include; one
finding 0% effect and one finding 50% effect (I’m not sure why these
studies weren’t included). They add:

    In none of these studies is the issue of reverse causality
    addressed; sometimes it is not even mentioned. This implies that the
    effect of health care spending on mortality may be overestimated.

They say:

    Based on our review of empirical studies, we conclude that it is
    likely that increased health care spending has contributed to the
    recent increase in life expectancy in the Netherlands. Applying the
    estimates form published studies to the observed increase in health
    care spending in the Netherlands between 2000 and 2010 [of 40%]
    would imply that 0.3% to almost 50% of the increase in life
    expectancy may have been caused by increasing health care spending.
    An important reason for the wide range in such estimates is that
    they all include methodological problems highlighted in this paper.
    However, this wide range inicates that the counterfactual study by
    Meerding et al, which argued that 50% of the increase in life
    expectancy in the Netherlands since the 1950s can be attributed to
    medical care, can probably be interpreted as an upper bound.

It’s going to be completely irresponsible to try to apply this to the
increase in health spending in the US over the past 50 years, since this
is probably different at every margin and the US is not the Netherlands
and the 1950s are not the 2010s. But if we irresponsibly take their
median estimate and apply it to the current question, we get that
increasing health spending in the US has been worth about one extra year
of life expectancy.

This study
<https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/ejournals/abstract/10.1055/s-0033-1354013>
attempts to directly estimate a %GDP health spending to life expectancy
conversion, and says that an increase of 1% GDP corresponds to an
increase of 0.05 years life expectancy. That would suggest a slightly
different number of 0.65 years life expectancy gained by healthcare
spending since 1960)

If these numbers seem absurdly low, remember all of those
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RAND_Health_Insurance_Experiment>
controlled experiments
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMsa1212321#t=articleTop> where
giving people insurance doesn’t seem to make them much healthier in any
meaningful way.

Or instead of slogging through the statistics, we can just ask the same
question as before. Do you think the average poor or middle-class person
would rather:

a) Get modern health care
b) Get the same amount of health care as their parents’ generation, but
with modern technology like ACE inhibitors, and also earn $8000 extra a year

_Fourth_, we se similar effects in infrastructure. The first New York
City subway opened around 1900. Various sources list lengths from 10 to
20 miles and costs from $30 million to $60 million dollars – I think my
sources are capturing it at different stages of construction with
different numbers of extensions. In any case, it suggests costs of
between $1.5 million to $6 million dollars/mile = $1-4 million per
kilometer. That looks like it’s about the inflation-adjusted equivalent
of $100 million/kilometer today, though I’m very uncertain about that
estimate. In contrast, Vox notes
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/1/1/14112776/new-york-second-avenue-subway-phase-2>
that a new New York subway line being opened this year costs about $2.2
/billion/ per kilometer, suggesting a cost increase of twenty times –
although I’m very uncertain about this estimate.

Things become clearer when you compare them country-by-country. The same
Vox article notes that Paris, Berlin, and Copenhagen subways cost about
$250 million per kilometer, almost 90% less. Yet even those European
subways are overpriced compared to Korea
<https://pedestrianobservations.wordpress.com/2013/06/03/comparative-subway-construction-costs-revised/>,
where a kilometer of subway in Seoul costs $40 million/km (another
Korean subway project cost $80 million/km). This is a difference of 50x
between Seoul and New York for apparently comparable services. It
suggests that the 1900s New York estimate above may have been roughly
accurate if their efficiency was roughly in line with that of modern
Europe and Korea.

_Fifth_, housing (source
<https://www.apartmentlist.com/rentonomics/rent-growth-since-1960/>:

Most of the important commentary on this graph has already been said
<http://i0.wp.com/fmshooter.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/too-damn-high.jpg?resize=676%2C459>,
but I would add that optimistic takes like this one
<http://www.aei.org/publication/todays-new-homes-are-1000-square-feet-larger-than-in-1973-and-the-living-space-per-person-has-doubled-over-last-40-years/>
by the American Enterprise Institute are missing some of the dynamic.
Yes, homes are bigger than they used to be, but part of that is zoning
laws which make it easier to get big houses than small houses. There are
a lot of people who would prefer to have a smaller house but don’t. When
I first moved to Michigan, I lived alone in a three bedroom house
because there were no good one-bedroom houses available near my
workplace and all of the apartments were loud and crime-y.

Or, once again, just ask yourself: do you think most poor and middle
class people would rather:

1. Rent a modern house/apartment
2. Rent the sort of house/apartment their parents had, for half the cost

*II.*

So, to summarize: in the past fifty years, education costs have doubled,
college costs have dectupled, health insurance costs have dectupled,
subway costs have at least dectupled, and housing costs have increased
by about fifty percent. US health care costs about four times as much as
equivalent health care in other First World countries; US subways cost
about eight times as much as equivalent subways in other First World
countries.

I worry that people don’t appreciate how weird this is. I didn’t
appreciate it for a long time. I guess I just figured that Grandpa used
to talk about how back in his day movie tickets only cost a nickel; that
was just the way of the world. /But all of the numbers above are
inflation-adjusted/. These things have dectupled in cost even /after/
you adjust for movies costing a nickel in Grandpa’s day. They have
really, genuinely dectupled in cost, no economic trickery involved.

And this is especially strange because we expect that improving
technology and globalization ought to cut costs. In 1983, the first
mobile phone cost $4,000 – about $10,000 in today’s dollars. It was also
a gigantic piece of crap. Today you can get a much better phone for
$100. This is the right and proper way of the universe. It’s why we fund
scientists, and pay businesspeople the big bucks.

But things like college and health care have /still/ had their prices
dectuple. Patients can now schedule their appointments online; doctors
can send prescriptions through the fax, pharmacies can keep track of
medication histories on centralized computer systems that interface with
the cloud, nurses get automatic reminders when they’re giving two drugs
with a potential interaction, insurance companies accept payment through
credit cards – and all of this costs ten times as much as it did in the
days of punch cards and secretaries who did calculations by hand.

It’s actually even worse than this, because we take so many
opportunities to save money that were unavailable in past generations.
Underpaid foreign nurses immigrate to America and work for a song.
Doctors’ notes are sent to India overnight where they’re transcribed by
sweatshop-style labor for pennies an hour. Medical equipment gets
manufactured in goodness-only-knows which obscure Third World country.
And it /still/ costs ten times as much as when this was all made in the
USA – and that back when minimum wages were proportionally higher than
today.

And it’s actually even worse than /this/. A lot of these services have
decreased in quality, presumably as an attempt to cut costs even
further. Doctors used to make house calls; even when I was young in the
’80s my father would still go to the houses of difficult patients who
were too sick to come to his office. This study
<http://epublications.marquette.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1017&context=nursing_fac>
notes that for women who give birth in the hospital, “the standard
length of stay was 8 to 14 days in the 1950s but declined to less than 2
days in the mid-1990s”. The doctors I talk to say this isn’t because
modern women are healthier, it’s because they kick them out as soon as
it’s safe to free up beds for the next person. Historic records of
hospital care generally describe leisurely convalescence periods and
making sure somebody felt absolutely well before letting them go; this
seems bizarre to anyone who has participated in a modern hospital, where
the mantra is to kick people out as soon as they’re “stable” ie not in
acute crisis.

If we had to provide the same quality of service as we did in 1960, and
without the gains from modern technology and globalization, who even
/knows/ how many times more health care would cost? Fifty times more? A
hundred times more?

And the same is true for colleges and houses and subways and so on.

*III.*

The existing literature on cost disease focuses on the Baumol effect
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baumol%27s_cost_disease>. Suppose in some
underdeveloped economy, people can choose either to work in a factory or
join an orchestra, and the salaries of factory workers and orchestra
musicians reflect relative supply and demand and profit in those
industries. Then the economy undergoes a technological revolution, and
factories can produce ten times as many goods. Some of the increased
productivity trickles down to factory workers, and they earn more money.
Would-be musicians leave the orchestras behind to go work in the
higher-paying factories, and the orchestras have to raise their prices
if they want to be assured enough musicians. So tech improvements in the
factory sectory raise prices in the orchestra sector.

We could tell a story like this to explain rising costs in education,
health care, etc. If technology increases productivity for skilled
laborers in other industries, then less susceptible industries might end
up footing the bill since they have to pay their workers more.

There’s only one problem: health care and education aren’t paying their
workers more; in fact, quite the opposite.

Here are teacher salaries over time (source
<https://fiftyfivemillion.wordpress.com/2013/11/28/teacher-salaries-rose-in-the-80s-and-theyve-been-slipping-since/>):

Teacher salaries are relatively flat adjusting for inflation. But
salaries for other jobs are increasing modestly relative to inflation.
So teacher salaries relative to other occupations’ salaries are actually
declining.

Here’s a similar graph for professors (source
<http://highereddatastories.blogspot.com/2014/07/changes-in-faculty-salaries-over-time.html>):

Professor salaries are going up a little, but again, they’re probably
losing position relative to the average occupation. Also, note that
although the average salary of each type of faculty is stable or
increasing, the average salary of all faculty is going down. No mystery
here – colleges are doing everything they can to switch from tenured
professors to adjuncts, who complain of being overworked and abused
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-allen-adjunct-professors-20131222-story.html>
while making about the same amount as a Starbucks barista.

This seems to me a lot like the case of the hospitals cutting care for
new mothers. The price of the service dectuples, yet at the same time
the service has to sacrifice quality in order to control costs.

And speaking of hospitals, here’s the graph for nurses (source
<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2208795>):

Female nurses’ salaries went from about $55,000 in 1988 to $63,000 in
2013. This is probably around the average wage increase during that
time. Also, some of this reflects changes in education
<http://www.aacn.nche.edu/media-relations/fact-sheets/nursing-fact-sheet>:
in the 1980s only 40% of nurses had a degree; by 2010, about 80% did.

And for doctors (source
<http://thelastpsychiatrist.com/2010/10/why_do_doctors_accept_gifts.html>)

Stable again! Except that a lot of doctors’ salaries now go to paying
off their medical school debt, which has been ballooning like everything
eles.

I don’t have a similar graph for subway workers, but come on. The
overall pictures is that health care and education costs have managed to
increase by ten times without a single cent of the gains going to
teachers, doctors, or nurses. Indeed these professions seem to have lost
ground salary-wise relative to others.

I also want to add some anecdote to these hard facts. My father is a
doctor and my mother is a teacher, so I got to hear a lot about how
these professions have changed over the past generation. It seems at
least a little like the adjunct story, although without the clearly
defined “professor vs. adjunct” dichotomy that makes it so easy to talk
about. Doctors are really, really, /really/ unhappy. When I went to
medical school, some of my professors would tell me outright that they
couldn’t believe anyone would still go into medicine with all of the new
stresses and demands placed on doctors. This doesn’t seem to be limited
to one medical school. /Wall Street Journal/: Why Doctors Are Sick Of
Their Profession
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-u-s-s-ailing-medical-system-a-doctors-perspective-1409325361>
– “American physicians are increasingly unhappy with their once-vaunted
profession, and that malaise is bad for their patients”. /The Daily
Beast/: How Being A Doctor Became The Most Miserable Profession
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/04/14/how-being-a-doctor-became-the-most-miserable-profession.html>
– “Being a doctor has become a miserable and humiliating undertaking.
Indeed, many doctors feel that America has declared war on physicians”.
/Forbes/: Why Are Doctors So Unhappy?
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/johngoodman/2014/09/11/why-are-doctors-so-unhappy/#766d4f2e1565>
– “Doctors have become like everyone else: insecure, discontent and
scared about the future.” /Vox/: Only Six Percent Of Doctors Are Happy
With Their Jobs
<http://www.vox.com/2014/9/8/6110839/doctors-low-morale-doctored-sandeep-jauhar>.
/Al Jazeera America/: Here’s Why Nine Out Of Ten Doctors Wouldn’t
Recommend Medicine As A Profession
<http://america.aljazeera.com/watch/shows/america-tonight/articles/2014/7/9/here-s-why-9-outof10doctorswouldntrecommendmedicineasaprofession.html>.
Read these articles and they all say the same thing that all the doctors
I know say – medicine used to be a well-respected, enjoyable profession
where you could give patients good care and feel self-actualized. Now it
kind of sucks.

Meanwhile, I also see articles like this piece from NPR
<http://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2016/12/30/505432203/teachers-are-stressed-and-that-should-stress-us-all>
saying teachers are experiencing historic stress levels and up to 50%
say their job “isn’t worth it”. Teacher job satisfaction is at historic
lows
<https://www.metlife.com/assets/cao/contributions/foundation/american-teacher/MetLife-Teacher-Survey-2011.pdf>.
And the veteran teachers I know say the same thing as the veteran
doctors I know – their jobs used to be enjoyable and make them feel like
they were making a difference; now they feel overworked, unappreciated,
and trapped in mountains of paperwork.

It might make sense for these fields to become more expensive if their
employees’ salaries were increasing. And it might make sense for
salaries to stay the same if employees instead benefitted from lower
workloads and better working conditions. But neither of these are happening.

*IV.*

So what’s going on? Why /are/ costs increasing so dramatically? Some
possible answers:

_First_, can we dismiss all of this as an illusion? Maybe adjusting for
inflation is harder than I think. Inflation is an average, so some
things have to have higher-than-average inflation; maybe it’s education,
health care, etc. Or maybe my sources have the wrong statistics.

But I don’t think this is true. The last time I talked about this
problem, someone mentioned they’re running a private school which does
just as well as public schools but costs only $3000/student/year, a
fourth of the usual rate. Marginal Revolution notes that
<http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2016/12/private-versus-public-health-care-india.html>
India has a private health system that delivers the same quality of care
as its public system for a quarter of the cost. Whenever the same drug
is provided by the official US health system and some kind of grey
market supplement sort of thing, the grey market supplement costs
between a fifth and a tenth as much; for example, Google’s first hit for
Deplin®, official prescription L-methylfolate, costs $175 for a month’s
supply
<https://www.healthwarehouse.com/deplin-15-mg-capsules-16381.html>;
unregulated L-methylfolate supplement delivers the same dose for about
$30
<https://www.amazon.com/Metabolic-Maintenance-MTHF-Capsules-Count/dp/B005FMZ6WA/ref=sr_1_1_a_it?ie=UTF8&qid=1485577393&sr=8-1&keywords=L-methylfolate+10+mg>.
And this isn’t even mentioning things like the $1 bag of saline that
costs $700 at hospitals
<https://www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2013/08/27/the-secret-of-salines-cost-why-a-1-bag-can-cost-700>.
Since it seems like it’s not too hard to do things for a fraction of
what we currently do things for, probably we should be less reluctant to
believe that the cost of everything is really inflated.

_Second_, might markets just not work? I know this is kind of an extreme
question to ask in a post on economics, but maybe nobody knows what
they’re doing in a lot of these fields and people can just increase
costs and not suffer any decreased demand because of it. Suppose that
people proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that Khan Academy could teach
you just as much as a normal college education, but for free. People
would still ask questions like – will employers accept my Khan Academy
degree? Will it look good on a resume? Will people make fun of me for
it? The same is true of community colleges, second-tier colleges,
for-profit colleges, et cetera. I got offered a free scholarship to a
mediocre state college, and I turned it down on the grounds that I knew
nothing about anything and maybe years from now I would be locked out of
some sort of Exciting Opportunity because my college wasn’t prestigious
enough. Assuming everyone thinks like this, can colleges just charge
whatever they want?

Likewise, my workplace offered me three different health insurance
plans, and I chose the middle-expensiveness one, on the grounds that I
had no idea how health insurance worked but maybe if I bought the cheap
one I’d get sick and regret my choice, and maybe if I bought the
expensive one I /wouldn’t/ be sick and regret my choice. I am a doctor,
my employer is a hospital, and the health insurance was for treatment in
my own health system. The moral of the story is that I am an idiot. The
second moral of the story is that people probably are not super-informed
health care consumers.

This can’t be pure price-gouging, since corporate profits haven’t
increased nearly enough to be where all the money is going. But a while
ago a commenter linked me to the Delta Cost Project
<http://www.deltacostproject.org/>, which scrutinizes the exact causes
of increasing college tuition. Some of it is the administrative bloat
that you would expect. But a lot of it is fun “student life” types of
activities like clubs, festivals, and paying Milo Yiannopoulos to speak
and then cleaning up after the ensuing riots. These sorts of things
improve the student experience, but I’m not sure that the average
student would rather go to an expensive college with
clubs/festivals/Milo than a cheap college without them. More important,
it doesn’t really seem like the average student is offered this choice.

This kind of suggests a picture where colleges expect people will pay
whatever price they set, so they set a very high price and then use the
money for cool things and increasing their own prestige. Or maybe
clubs/festivals/Milo become such a signal of prestige that students
avoid colleges that don’t comply since they worry their degrees won’t be
respected? Some people have pointed out that hospitals have switched
from many-people-all-in-a-big-ward to private rooms. Once again, nobody
seems to have been offered the choice between expensive hospitals with
private rooms versus cheap hospitals with roommates. It’s almost as if
industries have their own reasons for switching to
more-bells-and-whistles services that people don’t necessarily want, and
consumers just go along with it because for some reason they’re not
exercising choice the same as they would in other markets.

(this article on the Oklahoma City Surgery Center
<http://reason.com/blog/2017/01/27/what-happens-when-doctors-only-take-cash>
might be about a partial corrective for this kind of thing)

_Third_, can we attribute this to the inefficiency of government
relative to private industry? I don’t think so. The government handles
most primary education and subways, and has its hand in health care. But
we know that for-profit hospitals aren’t much cheaper than government
hospitals, and that private schools usually aren’t much cheaper (and are
sometimes more expensive) than government schools. And private colleges
cost more than government-funded ones.

_Fourth_, can we attribute it to indirect government intervention
through regulation, which public and private companies alike must deal
with? This seems to be at least part of the story in health care, given
how much money you can save by grey-market practices that avoid the FDA.
It’s harder to apply it to colleges, though some people have pointed out
regulations like Title IX that affect the educational sector.

One factor that seems to speak out against this is that starting with
Reagan in 1980, and picking up steam with Gingrich in 1994, we got an
increasing presence of Republicans in government who declared war on
overregulation – but the cost disease proceeded unabated. This is
suspicious, but in fairness to the Republicans, they did sort of fail
miserably at deregulating things. “The literal number of pages in the
regulatory code” is kind of a blunt instrument, but it doesn’t exactly
inspire confidence in the Republicans’ deregulation efforts:

Here’s a more interesting (and more fun) argument against regulations
being to blame: what about pet health care? Veterinary care is much less
regulated than human health care, yet its cost is rising as fast (or
faster) than that of the human medical system (popular article
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2016/09/27/the_cost_of_pet_health_care_could_be_rising_faster_than_the_cost_of_human.html>,
study <http://www.nber.org/papers/w22669>). I’m not sure what to make of
this.

_Fifth_, might the increased regulatory complexity happen not through
literal regulations, but through fear of lawsuits? That is, might
institutions add extra layers of administration and expense not because
they’re /forced/ to, but because they fear being sued if they don’t and
then something goes wrong?

I see this all the time in medicine. A patient goes to the hospital with
a heart attack. While he’s recovering, he tells his doctor that he’s
really upset about all of this. Any normal person would say “You had a
heart attack, of course you’re upset, get over it.” But if his doctor
says this, and then a year later he commits suicide for some unrelated
reason, his family can sue the doctor for “not picking up the warning
signs” and win several million dollars. So now the doctor consults a
psychiatrist, who does an hour-long evaluation, charges the insurance
company $500, and determines using her immense clinical expertise that
the patient is upset because he just had a heart attack.

Those outside the field have /no idea/ how much of medicine is built on
this principle. People often say that
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-belk/medical-malpractice-costs_b_4171189.html>
the importance of lawsuits to medical cost increases is overrated
because malpractice insurance doesn’t cost that much, but the situation
above would never look lawsuit-related; the whole thing only works
because everyone involved documents it as well-justified psychiatric
consult to investigate depression. Apparently some studies
<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/1904758>
suggest this isn’t happening, but all they do is survey doctors, and
with all due respect all the doctors /I/ know say the opposite.

This has nothing to do with government regulations (except insofar as
these make lawsuits easier or harder), but it sure can drive cost
increases, and it might apply to fields outside medicine as well.

_Sixth_, might we have changed our level of risk tolerance? That is,
might increased caution be due not purely to lawsuitphobia, but to
really caring more about whether or not people are protected? I read
stuff every so often about how playgrounds are becoming obsolete because
nobody wants to let kids run around unsupervised on something with sharp
edges. Suppose that one in 10,000 kids get a horrible playground-related
injury. Is it worth making playgrounds cost twice as much and be half as
fun in order to decrease that number to one in 100,000? This isn’t a
rhetorical question; I think different people can have legitimately
different opinions here (though there are probably some utilitarian
things we can do to improve them).

To bring back the lawsuit point, some of this probably relates to a
difference between personal versus institutional risk tolerance. Every
so often, an elderly person getting up to walk to the bathroom will fall
and break their hip. This is a fact of life, and elderly people deal
with it every day. Most elderly people I know don’t spend thousands of
dollars fall-proofing the route from their bed to their bathroom, or
hiring people to watch them at every moment to make sure they don’t
fall, or buy a bedside commode to make bathroom-related falls
impossible. This suggests a revealed preference that elderly people are
willing to tolerate a certain fall probability in order to save money
and convenience. Hospitals, which face huge lawsuits if any elderly
person falls on the premises, are /not/ willing to tolerate that
probability. They put rails on elderly people’s beds, place alarms on
them that will go off if the elderly person tries to leave the bed
without permission, and hire patient care assistants who among other
things go around carefully holding elderly people upright as they walk
to the bathroom (I assume
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/06/06/against-tulip-subsidies/> this job
will soon require at least a master’s degree). As more things become
institutionalized and the level of acceptable institutional risk
tolerance becomes lower, this could shift the cost-risk tradeoff even if
there isn’t a population-level trend towards more risk-aversion.

_Seventh_, might things cost more for the people who pay because so many
people don’t pay? This is somewhat true of colleges, where an increasing
number of people are getting in on scholarships funded by the tuition of
non-scholarship students. I haven’t been able to find great statistics
on this, but one argument against: couldn’t a college just not fund
scholarships, and offer much lower prices to its paying students? I get
that scholarships are good and altruistic, but it would be surprising if
every single college thought of its role as an altruistic institution,
and cared about it more than they cared about providing the same service
at a better price. I guess this is related to my confusion about why
more people don’t open up colleges. Maybe this is the “smart people are
rightly too scared and confused to go to for-profit colleges, and
there’s not enough ability to discriminate between the good and the bad
ones to make it worthwhile to found a good one” thing again.

This also applies in health care. Our hospital (and every other hospital
in the country) has some “frequent flier” patients who overdose on meth
at least once a week. They comes in, get treated for their meth overdose
(we can’t legally turn away emergency cases), get advised to get help
for their meth addiction (without the slightest expectation that they
will take our advice) and then get discharged. Most of them are poor and
have no insurance, but each admission costs a couple of thousand
dollars. The cost gets paid by a combination of taxpayers and other
hospital patients with good insurance who get big markups on their own
bills.

_Eighth_, might total compensation be increasing even though wages
aren’t? There definitely seems to be a pensions crisis, especially in a
lot of government work, and it’s possible that some of this is going to
pay the pensions of teachers, etc. My understanding is that in general
pensions aren’t really increasing much faster than wages
<http://www.epi.org/blog/professor-hubbards-claim-about-wage-and-compensation-stagnation-is-not-true/>,
but this might not be true in those specific industries. Also, this
might pass the buck to the question of why we need to spend more on
pensions now than in the past. I don’t think increasing life expectancy
explains all of this, but I might be wrong.

*IV.*

I mentioned politics briefly above, but they probably deserve more space
here. Libertarian-minded people keep talking about how there’s too much
red tape and the economy is being throttled. And less libertarian-minded
people keep interpreting it as not caring about the poor, or not
understanding that government has an important role in a civilized
society, or as a “dog whistle” for racism, or whatever. I don’t know why
more people don’t just come out and say “LOOK, REALLY OUR MAIN PROBLEM
IS THAT ALL THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS COST TEN TIMES AS MUCH AS THEY
USED TO FOR NO REASON, PLUS THEY SEEM TO BE GOING DOWN IN QUALITY, AND
NOBODY KNOWS WHY, AND WE’RE MOSTLY JUST DESPERATELY FLAILING AROUND
LOOKING FOR SOLUTIONS HERE.” State that clearly, and a lot of political
debates take on a different light.

For example: some people promote free universal college education,
remembering a time when it was easy for middle class people to afford
college if they wanted it. Other people oppose the policy, remembering a
time when people didn’t depend on government handouts. Both are true! My
uncle paid for his tuition at a really good college just by working a
pretty easy summer job – not so hard when college cost a tenth of what
it did now. The modern conflict between opponents and proponents of free
college education is over how to distribute our losses. In the old days,
we could combine low taxes with widely available education. Now we
can’t, and we have to argue about which value to sacrifice.

Or: some people get upset about teachers’ unions, saying they must be
sucking the “dynamism” out of education because of increasing costs.
Others people fiercely defend them, saying teachers are underpaid and
overworked. Once again, in the context of cost disease, both are
obviously true. The taxpayers are just trying to protect their right to
get education as cheaply as they used to. The teachers are trying to
protect their right to make as much money as they used to. The conflict
between the taxpayers and the teachers’ unions is about how to
distribute losses; /somebody/ is going to have to be worse off than they
were a generation ago, so who should it be?

And the same is true to greater or lesser degrees in the various debates
over health care, public housing, et cetera.

Imagine if tomorrow, the price of water dectupled. Suddenly people have
to choose between drinking and washing dishes. Activists argue that
taking a shower is a basic human right, and grumpy talk show hosts point
out that in /their/ day, parents taught their children not to waste
water. A coalition promotes laws ensuring government-subsidized free
water for poor families; a Fox News investigative report shows that some
people receiving water on the government dime are taking long luxurious
showers. Everyone gets really angry and there’s lots of talk about basic
compassion and personal responsibility and whatever but all of this is
secondary to /why does water costs ten times what it used to?/

I think this is the basic intuition behind so many people, even those
who genuinely want to help the poor, are afraid of “tax and spend”
policies. In the context of cost disease, these look like industries
constantly doubling, tripling, or dectupling their price, and the
government saying “Okay, fine,” and increasing taxes however much it
costs to pay for whatever they’re demanding now.

If we give everyone free college education, that solves a big social
problem. It also locks in a price which is ten times too high for no
reason. This isn’t fair to the government, which has to pay ten times
more than it should. It’s not fair to the poor people, who have to face
the stigma of accepting handouts for something they could easily have
afforded themselves if it was at its proper price. And it’s not fair to
future generations if colleges take this opportunity to increase the
cost by /twenty/ times, and then our children have to subsidize /that/.

I’m not sure how many people currently opposed to paying for free health
care, or free college, or whatever, would be happy to pay for health
care that cost less, that was less wasteful and more efficient, and
whose price we expected to go down rather than up with every passing
year. I expect it would be a lot.

And if it isn’t, who cares? The people who want to help the poor have
enough political capital to spend eg $500 billion on Medicaid; if that
were to go ten times further, then everyone could get the health care
they need without any more political action needed. If some government
program found a way to give poor people good health insurance for a few
hundred dollars a year, college tuition for about a thousand, and
housing for only two-thirds what it costs now, that would be the
greatest anti-poverty advance in history. That program is called “having
things be as efficient as they were a few decades ago”.

*V.*

In 1930, economist John Maynard Keynes predicted
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/01/economics> that his
grandchildrens’ generation would have a 15 hour work week. At the time,
it made sense. GDP was rising so quickly that anyone who could draw a
line on a graph could tell that our generation would be four or five
times richer than his. And the average middle-class person in his
generation felt like they were doing pretty well and had most of what
they needed. Why /wouldn’t/ they decide to take some time off and settle
for a lifestyle merely twice as luxurious as Keynes’ own?

Keynes was sort of right. GDP per capita /is/ 4-5x greater today than in
his time. Yet we still work forty hour weeks, and some
large-but-inconsistently-reported percent of Americans (76
<http://money.cnn.com/2013/06/24/pf/emergency-savings/>? 55
<https://20somethingfinance.com/percentage-of-americans-living-paycheck-to-paycheck/>?
47
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/nearly-half-of-americans-live-paycheck-to-paycheck-300256166.html>?)
still live paycheck to paycheck.

And yes, part of this is because inequality is increasing and most of
the gains are going to the rich
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2011/02/income-inequality-in-america-chart-graph>.
But this alone wouldn’t be a disaster; we’d get to Keynes’ utopia a
little slower than we might otherwise, but eventually we’d get there.
Most gains going to the rich means at least some gains are going to the
poor. And at least there’s a lot of mainstream awareness of the problem.

I’m more worried about the part where the cost of basic human needs goes
up faster than wages do. Even if you’re making twice as much money, if
your health care and education and so on cost ten times as much, you’re
going to start falling behind. Right now the standard of living isn’t
just stagnant, it’s at risk of declining
<http://www.businessinsider.com/younger-generations-are-worse-off-today-urban-institute-study-2013-3>,
and a lot of that is student loans and health insurance costs and so on.

What’s happening? I don’t know and I find it really scary.


      Share this:

  * Twitter
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/?share=twitter&nb=1>
  * Facebook5K+
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/?share=facebook&nb=1>
*

This entry was posted in Uncategorized
<http://slatestarcodex.com/category/uncategorized/> and tagged economics
<http://slatestarcodex.com/tag/economics/>, long post is long
<http://slatestarcodex.com/tag/long-post-is-long/>, too many graphs
<http://slatestarcodex.com/tag/too-many-graphs/>. Bookmark the permalink
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/>.
← Albion’s Seed, Genotyped
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/08/albions-seed-genotyped/>
OT69: The Open Of Akhnai →
<http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/12/ot69-the-open-of-akhnai/>


      Leave a Reply Cancel reply
      </2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#respond>

You must be logged in
<http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
to post a comment.


      954 Responses to /Considerations On Cost Disease/

 1.
    cassander says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:02 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465148>
    ~new~

    On teachers’ salaries, at least, the NCES data is data for WAGES
    only, not total compensation. Given their civil service protections,
    automatic, seniority based promotions, extremely generous benefits
    and pensions, a picture of flatlining wages is inaccurate. I’d also
    look at the sheer NUMBER of teachers employed over time, as I
    guarantee you that, nationwide, student/faculty ratios (to say
    nothing of student to administrator ratios) were substantially
    higher 40 years ago.

    On regulations, you have to look earlier than 75
    <http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-sU3HhJmO7Ug/Vlc12OvKXiI/AAAAAAAAA5g/1Mv9OiP28IQ/s1600/11.26.15%2Bchart%2B2.png>.
    The neo-liberal era (roughly 1980 till 2000, or maybe 2008) did slow
    things down a little, but that wave is clearly spent.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        wysinwygymmv says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:49 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465350>
        ~new~

            civil service protections

        Probably exaggerated. In liberal-as-hell Massachusetts, teachers
        don’t get “professional status” until their fourth year in a
        district and work year-to-year contracts before that. It is easy
        to make teachers’ lives miserable by giving them classes full of
        awful students, piling on paperwork, etc. until they quit. And
        NCLB and similar federal programs have given administrations a
        palette of tools they can use to pile black marks onto teachers’
        performance records to justify firing even long-standing
        teachers with tenure.

            automatic, seniority based promotions

        “Promotions”? In most schools, the only “promotion” you get from
        a “teacher” position is “department head”. This isn’t automatic,
        and it isn’t really a promotion. You get a small stipend, teach
        one less class, and do a hell of a lot more paperwork.

        You mean the guaranteed pay increases? As I mentioned before,
        they’re only guaranteed starting the fourth year since the
        school can decline to renew a contract any time before that. And
        the increases aren’t exactly mind-blowing either. Here’s
        <http://educatorcontracts.doemass.org/view.aspx?recno=160> a
        fairly typical Massachusetts school where an 11-year veteran
        with a Ph.D. makes $74,000, less than twice as much as the
        first-year bachelor’s degree with $47,000 (see Appendix A). (One
        major difference being, the 10-year veteran probably has a
        mortgage and children.) And you lose all that seniority as soon
        as you change districts, which is not exactly an uncommon
        occurrence.

        Those salaries are above the national median, but this is
        metrowest MA where cost of living is fairly high.

            extremely generous benefits

        Can you be more specific about what’s so generous about the
        benefits? I don’t think teachers get especially comprehensive
        insurance plans, even here in Massachusetts where the unions are
        pretty damned strong. I think they just get the standard
        bottom-of-the-line Romneycare plan. (And it’s part of their
        compensation like any other employer-provided health insurance.)

            pensions

        Nowadays, teachers get 403bs which are just mismanaged 401ks.

            I’d also look at the sheer NUMBER of teachers employed over
            time, as I guarantee you that, nationwide, student/faculty
            ratios

        Most of the drop in student/teacher ratio happened between 1965
        and 1985. The ratio has changed very little since 2005 as far as
        I can tell, while costs have if anything accelerated since then.

        Also, in 1965, teachers could hit or humiliate kids who got out
        of line. Now, teachers aren’t even allowed to give “time out”s.
        The lack of disciplinary tools available to teachers now
        decreases the size of the largest manageable class. (I also
        think culture is relevant to this, where kids used to have more
        respect for adults in general and teachers in particular.)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465148>
          o
            cassander says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:53 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465405>
            ~new~

            >Probably exaggerated. In liberal-as-hell Massachusetts,
            teachers don’t get “professional status” until their fourth
            year in a district and work year-to-year contracts before
            that. It is easy to make teachers’ lives miserable by giving
            them classes full of awful students, piling on paperwork,
            etc. until they quit.

            Do you know when most people get “impossible to fire
            status”? Never. And that’s a good thing.

            >You mean the guaranteed pay increases? As I mentioned
            before, they’re only guaranteed starting the fourth year
            since the school can decline to renew a contract any time
            before that. And the increases aren’t exactly mind-blowing
            either. Here’s a fairly typical Massachusetts school where
            an 11-year veteran with a Ph.D. makes $74,000, less than
            twice as much as the first-year bachelor’s degree with
            $47,000 (see Appendix A).

            And if that 11 year veteran slacks off and does a lousy job,
            how does it affect his pay? Not at all

            >Most of the drop in student/teacher ratio happened between
            1965 and 1985. The ratio has changed very little since 2005
            as far as I can tell, while costs have if anything
            accelerated since then.

            not according to the data presented by
            massivefocusedinaction
            <http://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/~/media/images/reports/2012/10/bg2739/chart1750.jpg>

            >Also, in 1965, teachers could hit or humiliate kids who got
            out of line. Now, teachers aren’t even allowed to give “time
            out”s. The lack of disciplinary tools available to teachers
            now decreases the size of the largest manageable class. (I
            also think culture is relevant to this, where kids used to
            have more respect for adults in general and teachers in
            particular.)

            sure, but that’s not the point of the discussion.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465350>
              +
                wysinwygymmv says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 11:04 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465412>
                ~new~

                    Do you know when most people get “impossible to fire
                    status”? Never. And that’s a good thing.

                Right. And most people in this case includes public
                school teachers.

                Maybe you misunderstood. “Professional status” just
                means “you have a stable contract, but we can fire you
                if you give us cause.” Without professional status, the
                school can decline to renew the teacher’s contract with
                no penalties whatsoever to the school. Teacher is SOL if
                they were depending on having the job and their contract
                isn’t renewed.

                    And if that 11 year veteran slacks off and does a
                    lousy job, how does it affect his pay? Not at all

                Uh, it will impact it 100% because they will get fired.
                As I mentioned before, accountability measures like NCLB
                give administrators a lot of leverage.

                I know at least one /fantastic/ teacher who had
                professional status and a record of year-by-year
                increasing the percentage of passes on the AP chemistry
                exam in her class in an otherwise poor-performing school
                who got fired because she didn’t comply with a bunch of
                the bullshit busywork ed reform stuff the administration
                tried to push on her. So not only is it possible to fire
                a slacker with tenure. It’s possible to fire a
                demonstrably extremely effective teacher with tenure!

                I know, I know, “anecdotal”, but it’s better than any
                evidence you’ve provided so far.

                    not according to the data presented by
                    massivefocusedinaction

                That’s not a graph of student/teacher ratio. (In fact,
                separating growth in faculty from growth in student body
                seems to be used to make the changes harder to compare,
                whereas just giving the ratio would make the comparison
                much easier — so this seems a little intentionally
                misleading.) Here’s one:

                http://toolbox.gpee.org/uploads/RTEmagicC_figure_8_studentteacher_ratio.png.png

                It’s hard to get good data for the last few years, so
                I’ll drop the “been flat since 2005 claim” in favor of
                “the drop in student/teacher ratio is linear but the
                cost increases are superlinear”.

                    sure, but that’s not the point of the discussion.

                If cultural and behavioral changes are the cause of part
                of the cost increase, then I think that’s a pretty
                interesting result, even if it doesn’t give you any
                justification for maligning school teachers.

                I take it you’re walking back the “extremely generous
                benefits and pensions” part?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465405>
                  #
                    Cliff says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:27 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465433>
                    ~new~

                    Do you know when most people get “stable contract
                    status”? Never.

                    Not sure why you are playing hide the ball and
                    talking about one school district in one state when
                    we are talking about the national public school system.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:34 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465440>
                    ~new~

                        Do you know when most people get “stable
                        contract status”? Never.

                    I think you misunderstand. “Professional status” for
                    a teacher is the same as “having a W-2” for
                    non-teachers. It’s like a normal salary job where if
                    they fire you without cause you can collect
                    unemployment insurance.

                    Not having professional status is like having a temp
                    job that lasts one year and your employer has the
                    choice to renew it or not. If they don’t renew it,
                    you don’t get unemployment insurance. You don’t have
                    any recourse. You have no grounds for a wrongful
                    termination suit.

                    I’m much more secure in my private sector tech job
                    than my wife (I’d expect my bosses to give me at
                    least one warning before firing me), I make about
                    twice as much in salary, I have better benefits.

                    I don’t work as hard, I’m not appreciably smarter
                    than her, and I probably don’t add nearly as much
                    value to society.

                        Not sure why you are playing hide the ball and
                        talking about one school district in one state
                        when we are talking about the national public
                        school system.

                    The assumption that I’m playing “hide the ball”
                    seems pretty uncharitable. I’m talking about schools
                    in MA because that’s what I know. I’m also talking
                    about schools in MA because MA has high cost of
                    living, unparalleled public school performance, and
                    disproportionately strong teachers’ unions compared
                    to the rest of the country, so if the accusations of
                    lazy overpaid coddled teachers don’t apply to MA,
                    then it’s hard to see how they’d apply anywhere.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    Eli says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:12 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465552>
                    ~new~

                    Actually, people in most countries get “stable
                    contract status” as soon as they start a full-time
                    professional job. It’s called, you know, a contract.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:34 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465614>
                    ~new~

                    @wysinwygymmv

                    >Maybe you misunderstood. “Professional status” just
                    means “you have a stable contract, but we can fire
                    you if you give us cause.”

                    Mass teachers get tenure
                    <https://malegislature.gov/Laws/GeneralLaws/PartI/TitleXII/Chapter71/Section41>
                    after 4 years, not just professional status. Tenure
                    is repeatedly described as “permanent” in these laws
                    and comes with the full suite of civil service
                    protections, which in practice, amounts to
                    practically un-fireable.

                    >Without professional status, the school can decline
                    to renew the teacher’s contract with no penalties
                    whatsoever to the school. Teacher is SOL if they
                    were depending on having the job and their contract
                    isn’t renewed.

                    You mean just like every employee in the private
                    sector who can be fired at will?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:50 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465628>
                    ~new~

                        Mass teachers get tenure after 4 years, not just
                        professional status. Tenure is repeatedly
                        described as “permanent” in these laws and comes
                        with the full suite of civil service
                        protections, which in practice, amounts to
                        practically un-fireable.

                    1. Tenure and professional status are synonyms.
                    2. Please provide evidence for the “un-fireable”
                    claim. I know for a fact that it’s possible to fire
                    tenured teachers, because I’ve seen it happen even
                    to teachers who were demonstrably very good at their
                    jobs (as I already mentioned).

                        You mean just like every employee in the private
                        sector who can be fired at will?

                    No. As I already explained, I am a private sector
                    employee and if I got fired without cause or laid
                    off, I would be able to collect unemployment
                    insurance. My wife does not have professional
                    status, so the school can just decline to renew her
                    contract. She gets no unemployment insurance, no
                    recourse to union intervention, no recourse to
                    wrongful termination suits.

                    Please read more carefully.

                    Edit: I haven’t read it yet, but you may find it
                    interesting:
                    http://haveyouheardblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Han_Teacher_dismissal_Feb_16.pdf

                    Edit 2:

                    http://www.southcoasttoday.com/article/20140616/NEWS/406160312

                        It goes on to explain the new system, in which
                        after a three-year evaluation period during
                        which they can be dismissed for any reason, new
                        teachers who perform well get “Professional
                        Teacher Status,” which gives them due process
                        rights, “not a job for life.”

                        “They continue to be evaluated thoroughly. If
                        they are struggling, they must be given guidance
                        on how to improve. If they fail to improve,
                        there is a speedy process of dismissing them,”
                        wrote the MTA.

                    That quote is from probably the most powerful
                    teacher’s union in the country.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:03 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465634>
                    ~new~

                    @wysinwygymmv

                    >2. Please provide evidence for the “un-fireable”
                    claim. I know for a fact that it’s possible to fire
                    tenured teachers with cause, because I’ve seen it
                    happen even to teachers who were demonstrably very
                    good at their jobs (as I already mentioned).

                    According to the latest NCES data
                    <https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/sass/tables/sass1112_2013311_d1s_008.asp>
                    the average district in Mass has 209 teachers, an
                    average of 2.2 of whom are fired every year for
                    cause. Of those 2.2, 1.9 are nontenured. They don’t
                    have a breakdown of the average tenured/non-tenured
                    ratio, but assuming the national average of 55%
                    tenured teachers, that means 1/5 of one percent of
                    tenured teachers are fired in a given year, vastly
                    below private sector rates, and slightly above the
                    national rate for teachers.

                    >She gets no unemployment insurance, no recourse to
                    union intervention, no recourse to wrongful
                    termination suits.

                    Again, except for UI, I don’t get any of those
                    things either. Now the UI thing should be fixed, but
                    it’s not the end of the universe and doesn’t
                    outweigh the many perks she gets when she does get
                    tenured.

                    >“They continue to be evaluated thoroughly. If they
                    are struggling, they must be given guidance on how
                    to improve. If they fail to improve, there is a
                    speedy process of dismissing them,” wrote the MTA.

                    That they say it does’t make it true. the numbers
                    don’t lie. “Due process rights” are precisely the
                    civil service protections I’m talking about. To fire
                    anyone, an employer has to prove to an arbitrator
                    that they are firing them for cause. That is a very
                    large burden, the process can take months or years
                    and doesn’t always work. A year ago, the DC metro
                    caught fire and it was found that the maintainer
                    signing off on that section was faking his records.
                    he appealed his dismissal arguing that while it was
                    true he faked his records, so did everyone else so
                    it wasn’t fair to fire him. he got his job back.
                    <http://wtop.com/tracking-metro-24-7/2016/07/metro-union-sues-get-worker-fired-deadly-smoke-incident-back-job/>.
                    The union then sued again for not giving it back to
                    him fast enough.

                    These protections are orders of magnitudes more than
                    exist in any private sector workplace, and they are
                    poisonous for efficiency.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:40 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465666>
                    ~new~

                        They don’t have a breakdown of the average
                        tenured/non-tenured ratio, but assuming the
                        national average of 55% tenured teachers, that
                        means 1/5 of one percent of tenured teachers are
                        fired in a given year, vastly below private
                        sector rates, and slightly above the national
                        rate for teachers.

                    Should we be comparing to the private sector
                    average? Isn’t that driven largely by the industries
                    with extremely high turnover (entertainment,
                    hospitality, food service)? Teachers are certainly
                    fired at a low rate, but it’s not clear that the
                    private sector average is driven by poor performance
                    or that high turnover rates actually improve
                    performance in any industry. (Granted, that’s moving
                    the goalposts a bit.)

                        Again, except for UI, I don’t get any of those
                        things either. Now the UI thing should be fixed,
                        but it’s not the end of the universe and doesn’t
                        outweigh the many perks she gets when she does
                        get tenured.

                    “I don’t get any of that, except the relevant one!”

                    Yes, exactly.

                    Unemployment insurance and tenure are fulfilling the
                    same function, here. People require more stability
                    in their lives than most employers are willing to
                    offer. The solution in most public sector settings
                    is unemployment insurance, and the solution in most
                    educational settings is tenure.

                    She doesn’t get “many perks” when she gets tenure.
                    She will still have a quarterly review process that
                    is considerably more adversarial than my annual
                    review process, and she can be disciplined and
                    ultimately fired on the basis of poor performance
                    reviews. Again, I’ve seen this happen so
                    “unfireable” is at best an exaggeration. I cannot
                    think of any other “perks” that she gets except for
                    a guaranteed raise that is, in practice, much lower
                    than the increases in pay I’ve consistently gotten
                    in my private sector job over the last 7 years. If
                    anything, that’s the opposite of a “perk”. There is
                    one “perk”, which is tenure, and it is comparable in
                    value to unemployment insurance.

                    And it can feel like the end of the world if you are
                    trying to buy a house and start a family and those
                    efforts depend on the income from that non-tenured
                    teaching job.

                        To fire anyone, an employer has to prove to an
                        arbitrator that they are firing them for cause.
                        That is a very large burden, the process can
                        take months or years and doesn’t always
                        work….These protections are orders of magnitudes
                        more than exist in any private sector workplace,
                        and they are poisonous for efficiency.

                    This might or might not cost the company as much as
                    unemployment insurance, depending on the
                    circumstances. In some cases, “orders of magnitude”
                    might be true, but I think that is only rare and
                    isolated cases. I suspect there is not much
                    difference in average.

                    I think you’re dramatically overestimating the
                    extent to which lower job security benefits
                    efficiency or similar measures in the private sector.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:53 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465675>
                    ~new~

                    @wysinwygymmv says:

                    >Should we be comparing to the private sector
                    average? Isn’t that driven largely by the industries
                    with extremely high turnover (entertainment,
                    hospitality, food service)? Teachers are certainly
                    fired at a low rate, but it’s not clear that the
                    private sector average is driven by poor performance
                    or that high turnover rates actually improve
                    performance in any industry. (Granted, that’s moving
                    the goalposts a bit.) And remember, we’re not
                    counting voluntary separations, but actual removals
                    for cause.

                    I’m happy to credit this argument IF you can show
                    evidence to it.

                    >“I don’t get any of that, except the relevant one!”

                    My point is that the others are far more relevant.

                    >Unemployment insurance and tenure are fulfilling
                    the same function, here.

                    No, they don’t. UE doesn’t prevent your employer
                    from getting rid of you if you do a bad job. Tenure
                    does.

                    >She will still have a quarterly review process that
                    is considerably more adversarial than my annual
                    review process, and she can be disciplined and
                    ultimately fired on the basis of poor performance
                    reviews.

                    I’ve already showed the evidence that they are NOT
                    more adversarial, at least when it comes to actual
                    firings.

                    >Again, I’ve seen this happen so “unfireable” is at
                    best an exaggeration.

                    anecdotes are not data. the data says that tenured
                    teachers are almost never fired.

                    >I cannot think of any other “perks” that she gets
                    except for a guaranteed raise that is, in practice,
                    much lower than the increases in pay I’ve
                    consistently gotten in my private sector job over
                    the last 7 years.

                    You probably got those raises because you did a good
                    job. I assume your wife also did a good job, and
                    didn’t. But that’s not the point, the point is that
                    if she HADN’T done a good job, she’d have gotten
                    those raises. If you hadn’t gotten a good job, you’d
                    have gotten nothing, or maybe fired. You’re
                    considering only the upside for good workers and
                    ignoring the bad. I fully grant you that, if you
                    want to work hard, make a difference, and do a good
                    job, public sector employment can be a raw deal, but
                    that’s precisely the problem. the system, on the
                    whole refuses to either punish bad behavior or
                    reward good, which results in a lot more bad behavior.

                    > If anything, that’s the opposite of a “perk”.
                    There is one “perk”, which is tenure, and it is
                    comparable in value to unemployment insurance.

                    Mathematically, inability to be fired is vastly more
                    valuable than part of your salary if you are fired.

                    >This might or might not cost the company as much as
                    unemployment insurance, depending on the circumstances.

                    It’s not just the cost to the company, it’s cost to
                    the managers who have to fill out all the paperwork
                    and build a court case against bad employees.

                    >I think that is only rare and isolated cases. I
                    suspect there is not much difference in average.

                    I’ve shown you evidence
                    <http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/washington/2011-07-18-fderal-job-security_n.htm>
                    to the contrary. Please show me what makes you
                    suspect the opposite.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 5:33 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465702>
                    ~new~

                        No, they don’t. UE doesn’t prevent your employer
                        from getting rid of you if you do a bad job.
                        Tenure does.

                    I was more specific than you are taking into
                    account: they are both filling the gap between the
                    employee’s need for stability and the employer’s
                    unwillingness to provide that stability. Yes, there
                    are other effects that may be more or less desirable
                    depending. For the record, I don’t mind considering
                    the replacement of tenure with unemployment
                    insurance for teachers. That’s just not the
                    situation as it stands today.

                        the system, on the whole refuses to either
                        punish bad behavior or reward good, which
                        results in a lot more bad behavior.

                    The thing is, you only have really indirect evidence
                    for bad behavior. If we assume you’re right on with
                    the extent to which public school teachers are too
                    safe from firing, then I think you’re vastly
                    overestimating:
                    -the ease with which private sector employees are fired
                    -the positive effect such firings have on
                    performance for private firms
                    -the negative effect on school performance of the
                    difficulty to fire teachers

                        I’ve shown you evidence to the contrary. Please
                        show me what makes you suspect the opposite.

                    You’ve shown me evidence that federal employees are
                    very hard to fire. You haven’t shown me evidence
                    that this causes lots of inefficiency.

                    You also claimed that the difference in difficulty
                    in firing was “orders of magnitude”, but this
                    article says the private sector average is 3% and
                    you previously cited statistics showing that MA
                    fires public school teachers at a rate of 1%
                    (including non-tenured), so at best I think you’ve
                    vastly overstated your case.

                    I think you’ve fairly proven that it’s hard to fire
                    tenured teachers, but you haven’t proven that this
                    has much impact on school performance. Maybe we
                    should look at the performance of schools compared
                    to percentage of workforce who are tenured. My
                    hypothesis: schools with higher percentages of
                    tenured teachers will perform better than schools
                    with lower percentages of tenured teachers.

                    This is because schools with more tenured teachers
                    will have higher morale among teachers, there will
                    be more solid working relationships between teachers
                    and administrators, teachers will have more
                    community ties, and teachers will on average be more
                    experienced.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 6:30 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465729>
                    ~new~

                    @wysinwygymmv says:

                    >I was more specific than you are taking into
                    account: they are both filling the gap between the
                    employee’s need for stability and the employer’s
                    unwillingness to provide that stability.

                    That people might want them for the same reasons
                    does NOT make them the same. those other effects are
                    important.

                    >The thing is, you only have really indirect
                    evidence for bad behavior.

                    I have plenty of direct evidence.
                    <http://nypost.com/2016/01/17/city-pays-exiled-teachers-to-snooze-as-rubber-rooms-return/>
                    Please stop moving goalposts.

                    >I’ve shown you evidence to the contrary. Please
                    show me what makes you suspect the opposite.

                    No you haven’t. However, the contrary evidence is
                    easy, private school teachers produce better results
                    <https://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pubs/studies/2006461.asp>
                    AND are paid less.
                    <https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_211.10.asp>

                    >You also claimed that the difference in difficulty
                    in firing was “orders of magnitude”, but this
                    article says the private sector average is 3% and
                    you previously cited statistics showing that MA
                    fires public school teachers at a rate of 1%
                    (including non-tenured),

                    You’re mis-representing what I said. I said
                    non-tenured teachers were harder to fire, and I was
                    right. their rate of firing is 1/5 of one percent,
                    more than a order of magnitude less.

                    >My hypothesis: schools with higher percentages of
                    tenured teachers will perform better than schools
                    with lower percentages of tenured teachers.

                    Show evidence of that. I’ve shown evidence to the
                    contrary.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 7:18 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465765>
                    ~new~

                        You’re mis-representing what I said. I said
                        non-tenured teachers were harder to fire, and I
                        was right. their rate of firing is 1/5 of one
                        percent, more than a order of magnitude less.

                    To make an apples-to-apples comparison, though, you
                    need to compare private sector employes fired /after
                    at least four years of continuous employment/ to
                    firing rates for tenured teachers. I suspect they’d
                    probably be fairly comparable.

                    Many (from my experience, the vast majority) people
                    who are going to be problem employees are pretty
                    evidently problem employees within their first year.
                    A four-year probationary period is going to weed out
                    a huge number of potential problems before they ever
                    make it into your “tenured teacher” category.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 2:38 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465849>
                    ~new~

                    I’m curious about the claim that if a teacher’s
                    contract is not renewed she doesn’t get unemployment
                    insurance. That seems odd–could you explain why? I
                    don’t know the rules in Massachessetts, but checking
                    the web page for the program in California, under
                    “eligibility” I find:

                    To be entitled to benefits, you must be:

                    Out of work due to no fault of your own.
                    Physically able to work.
                    Actively seeking work.
                    Ready to accept work.

                    Why wouldn’t an unemployed teacher qualify? Looking
                    down the web page I don’t find any exception for
                    teachers.

                    Doing a search for “teacher” it’s clear that
                    teachers can receive unemployment insurance–there’s
                    a discussion of special circumstances when they
                    can’t (if the claim is filed during a recess period
                    and they have an offer from the school to go back to
                    work when the recess if over).

                    Here
                    <http://www.mass.gov/lwd/unemployment-insur/basic-ui-information/understanding-eligibility-requirements.html>
                    is the page for Massachusetts. It has a list of
                    categories of workers that are not eligible, and
                    teachers are not on it.

                    A search for “teacher” finds:

                        Claimant laid off from a full-time teacher
                        position during the base period subsequently
                        worked as an on-call substitute with reasonable
                        assurance of returning to work as a substitute
                        after summer vacation. Because the entire base
                        period employment is considered; not just the
                        last job before summer break, she was eligible
                        for benefits based upon the full-time teacher wages.

                    So as far as I can tell, your claim is not true for
                    Massachusetts. Perhaps you can find something on the
                    web page to support it?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    Corey says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 8:42 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466080>
                    ~new~

                    @DavidFriedman: Any “temp” job (that is, a job with
                    a defined end date, like a 1-year-long teacher
                    contract) is ineligible for unemployment benefits.
                    (I can only speak to OH and NC but I assume all
                    States are the same there. Otherwise, you could get
                    unemployment compensation after your summer
                    internship, term of elected office, etc.)

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    blukester says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 5:43 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466549>
                    ~new~

                    Here are some articles describing how teachers in
                    NYC cannot be fired.
                    http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/education/city-spend-29m-paying-educators-fire-article-1.1477027
                    http://nypost.com/2015/03/21/nyc-schools-removed-289-teachers-but-only-fired-9/

                    In fact, in NYC there is a term for this “The Rubber
                    Room”, see
                    http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/08/31/the-rubber-room

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
                  #
                    Edward Scizorhands says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:43 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466795>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t know what the correct rate for firing
                    teachers is.

                    I do know that 0.5% is too low. Anyone who has
                    worked knows that the thought that you could get
                    together 200 of your coworkers — even skipping those
                    who had only been on the job a year or two to leave
                    short-termers out of your pool — and find only one
                    slacker is nonsense.

                    Again, I don’t know what the correct firing rate is.

                    For separate anecdote, my dad got unemployment when
                    he was let go from a private school at the end of
                    the school year.

                    And according to the Massachusetts Teachers
                    Association, laid-off teachers can collect
                    unemployment:
                    http://www.massteacher.org/memberservices/~/media/Files/legal/mta_rif_booklet_2014_web.pdf

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465412>
          o
            MostlyCredibleHulk says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 8:17 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465786>
            ~new~

            With pensions, it’s less important what teachers get nowdays
            when they join than what they get when they leave – i.e.
            what has been promised to them 20 or 30 years ago.

            Also, if it’s so easy to fire a teacher, how the phenomenon
            of “rubber rooms” in e.g. New York is explained, where
            teachers essentially spend years doing nothing because they
            can’t be allowed to teach (because of some fault) but can’t
            be fired either? Here HuffPo article claims it costs 22M a year:
            http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/16/rubber-rooms-in-new-york-city-22-million_n_1969749.html

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465350>
          o
            baconbacon says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 10:01 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465907>
            ~new~

                Can you be more specific about what’s so generous about
                the benefits?

            From the collective bargaining agreement you linked

                Upon the approval of the School Committee, a teacher who
                has served seven (7) years full-time in the Melrose
                school system may be given up to a full year’s leave of
                absence for study at three-fourths (3/4) salary.

                Course Reimbursement: During each year of the Agreement,
                the School Committee will allocate the sum of $30,000 to
                be used to reimburse bargaining unit members for the
                cost of up to two (2) courses at an accredited college
                or university, provided that –

                In recognition of added professional training in courses
                directly related to their teaching field and approved by
                the Superintendent, bargaining unit members shall
                receive added annual salary for each fifteen (15) credit
                hours earned above the Bachelor’s and Master’s levels,
                as set forth in the salary schedules, except that in no
                case will credits in excess of sixty (60) hours to
                holders of the Bachelor’s degree, or sixty (60) hours to
                holders of a Master’s degree be approved, unless the
                member has earned a Doctorate degree. Bargaining unit
                members must earn a grade of B-or better in courses
                approved under this provision, in order to receive
                credit for them for purposes of lane advancement.

            How many places of work guarantee a higher salary for more
            education, while also paying for that education?

            Lots of interesting incentives for not using sick leave

                Senior Teacher Salary Increase: An employee who is
                forty-five (45) years of age or older, is on the top
                step of the salary schedule set forth in Appendix A
                (i.e., has completed at least eleven (11) years of
                service as a bargaining unit member) and has at least
                one hundred (100) days of accrued, unused sick leave may
                elect to receive an additional one thousand dollars
                ($1,000) per year in base salary for a period of up to
                ten (10) years (not cumulative, up to a total often
                thousand dollars ($10,000)

                A teacher age fifty-five (55) or older who gives notice
                of departure for the purpose of retirement by December
                31st preceding the next following June 30th and who
                actually leaves the Melrose school system as of the end
                of the teacher work year, but not later than said June
                30th, shall receive a lump sum payment calculated by
                multiplying $100 times (x):

                x = the number of accumulated sick days credited to such
                teacher at time of retirement up to one hundred (100),
                minus the number of sick days used in the final teacher
                work year in excess often (10). In no event shall the
                incentive payment exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

                And the increases aren’t exactly mind-blowing either.
                Here’s a fairly typical Massachusetts school where an
                11-year veteran with a Ph.D. makes $74,000

            Looking through this it appears as if this would increase to
            up to $84,000 a year if you hit specific sick leave
            incentives, and could be augmented with other activities (up
            to ~$16,000 a year for a dual role of head football and
            baseball coach appears to be the max), for 183 scheduled
            work days a year.

                Nowadays, teachers get 403bs which are just mismanaged
                401ks.

            This link
            <http://www.mass.gov/mtrs/docs/active/retirementpercentagechart-tier2.pdf>
            has a schedule for retirement benefits for Massachusettes
            teachers starting after 2012, how generous theses packages
            are depends on the contribution rates etc, but very few
            private salaried positions have anything like defined
            retirement benefits these days.

            Doing a quick scroll through this contract I would say that
            none of the individual benefits listed seem excessive, but
            the sum total actually might well be. Frequently in the
            private sector you have the opportunity to work for a place
            with either good retirement benefits, or good health
            benefits, or good vacation packages, but it is pretty rare
            to have all three available along with other perks
            (continued education benefits).

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465350>
          o
            gin-and-whiskey says:	
            February 13, 2017 at 5:56 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466943>
            ~new~

                It is easy to make teachers’ lives miserable by giving
                them classes full of awful students, piling on
                paperwork, etc. until they quit. And NCLB and similar
                federal programs have given administrations a palette of
                tools they can use to pile black marks onto teachers’
                performance records to justify firing even long-standing
                teachers with tenure.

            We’re talking about the distinction between teachers and the
            rest of us. The fact that a bad boss /can /selectively try
            to make a teacher miserable is a red herring. The issue is
            /why/ they are forced to resort to doing so, instead of just
            firing you. And the answer is “they’re not at-will
            employees, and they have the backing of a union” is an
            enormous job benefit.

                “Promotions”? In most schools, the only “promotion” you
                get from a “teacher” position is “department head”. This
                isn’t automatic, and it isn’t really a promotion. You
                get a small stipend, teach one less class, and do a hell
                of a lot more paperwork.

            Pay increases.

                You mean the guaranteed pay increases?

            Yup! In my town it’s 5%, like clockwork, good times or bad.

                As I mentioned before, they’re only guaranteed starting
                the fourth year since the school can decline to renew a
                contract any time before that.

            First, what percentage of contracts are not renewed? I don’t
            think it’s many.
            Second, do you realize that DURING a contract–IOW, during
            one of those four years–the teacher still has more
            protection than any at-will employee, which is almost
            everyone else?

                And the increases aren’t exactly mind-blowing either.
                Here’s a fairly typical Massachusetts school where an
                11-year veteran with a Ph.D. makes $74,000, less than
                twice as much as the first-year bachelor’s degree with
                $47,000 (see Appendix A).

            One wonders how many PhDs are working in public schools,
            outside administration. Answer: One percent
            <https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d11/tables/dt11_072.asp>,
            and I’d bet good money that a lot of them have
            administration roles. And of course one wonders what they’d
            be worth elsewhere (if they were good enough to teach
            college they’d probably be doing it), so i don’t know if
            this is much data. more to the point,

                (One major difference being, the 10-year veteran
                probably has a mortgage and children.)

            Another major difference probably being that the PhD. is
            paid for in whole or in part by the school while working,
            unlike many folks.And a lot of them are in an edu-field
            (pedagogy) and not a hard field (math) so are merely an
            administrator grooming tool.

                Can you be more specific about what’s so generous about
                the benefits?

            Well, most obviously you get roughly 16 weeks of vacation
            instead of the normal 2-3 weeks. You also get a pension in
            many cases, and the above-mentioned job security; and the
            benefit of a union; and paid training; and…

                I don’t think teachers get especially comprehensive
                insurance plans, even here in Massachusetts where the
                unions are pretty damned strong. I think they just get
                the standard bottom-of-the-line Romneycare plan.

            Dunno, but….

                (And it’s part of their compensation like any other
                employer-provided health insurance.)

            Sure, if the employer got to tax the public to pay for it.
            Our district pays teachers most of their insurance costs.

            Late on, you mention this, which I will depersonalize:

                I don’t work as hard [as teachers], I’m not appreciably
                smarter than [teachers],

            I don’t know about you, but for many people: Yes you do, and
            yes you are.

            W/r/t work: Teachers put in long days like many folks–40 to
            50 hour weeks are not uncommon–but they don’t put in MORE
            work than most other degreed professionals. Certainly not if
            you count the vacation. Yeah, they have occasional long days
            but so do we all.

            W/r/t intelligence: If you’re dealing with an education
            major then yes, the chances are that your average STEM-major
            SSC reader is in fact smarter than the teacher.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465350>
      *
        MostlyCredibleHulk says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 8:13 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465785>
        ~new~

        Saw this table recently:
        http://www.aei.org/publication/friday-afternoon-links-21/ which
        suggests the teaching and admin staff grows much faster than
        student number.

        Also, given that pensions cost very little immediately (or at
        least can be made to seem so) and are a good way to placate
        unions, I’d expect pension commitments increase for some time
        without noticeable effect on costs, until people start retiring
        and then it turns out pension fund is underfunded and needs more
        money in it. Which might be where we are now.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465148>
 2.
    Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:07 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465150>
    ~new~

        saying teachers are overpaid and underworked

    I think you mean “underpaid and overworked”?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        J says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:12 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465153>
        ~new~

        (typo thread)
        “people can just increase costs and not suffer any increased
        demand because of it” -> decreased demand

        “second,,” (double comma)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465150>
          o
            J says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:27 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465158>
            ~new~

            “elderly people live deal with it every day” -> deal

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465153>
              +
                albertborrow says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 12:47 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465163>
                ~new~

                Also, in one of the first quotes, Scott writes “they
                conclude:” and then the quote starts with “based on x we
                conclude”. I would edit that to reduce redundancy.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465158>
                  #
                    HedonicRegression says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:29 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465213>
                    ~new~

                    “we se similar effects”

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465163>
          o
            Rachael says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:38 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465257>
            ~new~

            “grandchildrens’” -> “grandchildren’s”

            “I think this is the basic intuition behind so many people,
            even those who genuinely want to help the poor, are afraid
            of “tax and spend” policies.” -> “…behind *why* so many
            people” ?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465153>
          o
            sty_silver says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 8:35 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465901>
            ~new~

            /they comes in, get treated for their meth overdose/
            comes -> come

            /why does water costs/
            costs -> cost

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465153>
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:41 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465344>
        ~new~

        Having worked in a school, I’d be inclined to accept Gazeboist’s
        correction, but to be fair, they have to teach classes of twelve
        to eighteen year olds all day, five days a week.

        A million dollars/pounds/euro a year wouldn’t be enough to get
        me to do that. Plus these days, the amount of paperwork and
        box-ticking is crazy, and you can’t give a misbehaving student a
        clip round the ear/slap with the /báta/ while they can swear at
        you, throw things at you, and physically assault you. Teachers
        are also being asked to be child-minders, do child-rearing
        (teaching them things their parents should be teaching them
        about how to be a human being), social workers and more.

        From some angles, it’s a cushy job. From others, you need to be
        really dedicated to it because it’s not for everyone.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465150>
          o
            Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465703>
            ~new~

            *Shrug*.

            In isolation, it could have been either (though of course
            they would imply different things about his views), but in
            context Scott clearly meant the opposite of what he
            initially wrote.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465344>
 3.
    massivefocusedinaction says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:08 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465151>
    ~new~

    I’d look further at the ratio of administrators to teachers/doctors
    etc, and the cost of complying with regulation for the fairly
    decentralized health and education sectors. Which line looks more
    like the education cost line
    <http://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/~/media/images/reports/2012/10/bg2739/chart1750.jpg>?

    Regarding your question on markets working, one of these things is
    delivered by a mostly free market, the other isn’t: Google’s first
    hit for Deplin®, official prescription L-methylfolate, costs $175
    for a month’s supply; unregulated L-methylfolate supplement delivers
    the same dose for about $30.

    Why can’t a manufacturer of L-methylfolate suppliments undercut the
    perscription sellers? That’s why markets aren’t delivering the cost
    savings they should be.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        albertborrow says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:55 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465168>
        ~new~

        Saying regulations increase prices and limit market mobility is
        not something new or original, but part of the question is
        whether the cheaper price of the free market is actually worth
        it. Unless I fundamentally misunderstand what a grey-market is,
        I would imagine that the grey-market dealers are not going to be
        as cautious about their doses, or as picky about how they
        fabricate the materials. Part of the price of medicine is paying
        for the FDA-approved label, whether it’s through the better
        treatment of workers or the better quality material. The biggest
        problem with this is the fact that we don’t seem to be treating
        the workers better, nor getting better quality materials. (at
        least in the fields of education, medicine, and public works)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465151>
          o
            newt0311 says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:25 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465210>
            ~new~

            Why does it have to be the FDA? Why can’t it be some private
            credentialing organization that customers can choose to pay
            attention to or not?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465168>
              +
                Itai Bar-Natan says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 8:27 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465318>
                ~new~

                If you want to convince us to buy grey-market
                pharmaceuticals, shouldn’t you be answering that
                question? Why aren’t there any private credentialing
                organization to tell which grey-market products are high
                quality? If there is one, why should I trust it? I know
                the FDA has a long reputation of strict certification,
                if you name some competing organization I’ve never heard
                of it might be a random scam.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465210>
                  #
                    newt0311 says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 9:50 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465351>
                    ~new~

                    Because the FDA is mandated by government fiat? Duh…?

                    There’s no point in a private organization setting
                    safety requirements because the FDA has already set
                    the minimum safety requirements way way too high (on
                    average) and nobody can reduce it (short of
                    fundamental changes to the law). Any organization
                    doing this at a large enough scale to get noticed by
                    the doctors would be noticed by the FDA and probably
                    sued out of existence.

                    Also, I’m not trying to get you to buy gray-market
                    pharmaceuticals. Where did you get that idea? I’m
                    trying to point out that safety rules/screening
                    don’t automatically imply the FDA.

                    One example here is helmets. They all have to be DOT
                    certified (in the US). However there is a private
                    organization with higher requirements (Snell). Some
                    helmets get Snell certification and some do not. The
                    distinction is generally understood (at least when
                    it comes to motorcycle helmets) and some customers
                    pay attention to Snell certification and some do not.

                    The benefit of Snell is that it is possible to set
                    up competitor organizations with different standards
                    without going through the heavy-weight process of
                    legislation. It is also possible to have gradations
                    for different people with different price and risk
                    tolerances.

                    My questions is: why can’t we do the same for drugs?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
                  #
                    Error says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 9:58 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465360>
                    ~new~

                    For the specific case of nootropics, I think there’s
                    a reddit board that does exactly that.

                    Whether it’s trustworthy I don’t know.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
                  #
                    Itai Bar-Natan says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 10:13 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465371>
                    ~new~

                        Also, I’m not trying to get you to buy
                        gray-market pharmaceuticals. Where did you get
                        that idea? I’m trying to point out that safety
                        rules/screening don’t automatically imply the FDA.

                    You’re right, my response was off-the-cuff and I
                    didn’t think carefully about what exactly you were
                    trying to argue for.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
                  #
                    CarpathoRusyn says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:31 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465436>
                    ~new~

                    @newt0311

                    The system of having an independent organization
                    like Snell works as long as there is just one of
                    them. Once you have multiple rating agencies
                    competing against each other to get the helmet
                    manufacturers’ business the incentive scheme becomes
                    perverse. Snell would be incentivized to give as
                    many helmets as high a rating as possible because
                    some other rating org could come in and undercut
                    them. If I were building helmets why would I bring
                    them to Snell if I can get an A+ rating from some
                    other organization?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:01 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465461>
                    ~new~

                    Reputation.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:53 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465581>
                    ~new~

                    @CarpathoRusyn: By this logic, shouldn’t increased
                    competition in, say, movie or video game review
                    sites result in a race to the bottom where they’re
                    all awarding everything 10/10 in a scramble for
                    favors from studios? And yet that’s not what we see;
                    if anything, the proliferation of review channels on
                    the internet has made reviews /more/ honest and
                    critical in the last 15 years compared to the era
                    before that where entertainment products were mostly
                    reviewed by a few major magazines.

                    Personally, I’m far less trusting of rating and
                    review agencies that /don’t/ have competitors to
                    verify their results and keep them honest. It
                    massively increases the potential for bribery,
                    pressure and other malfeasance.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
                  #
                    Tracy W says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:19 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465646>
                    ~new~

                    @CarpathoRyson: the competition is two sided. As a
                    consumer, would you trust a rating slapped on every
                    helmet in the shop?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465318>
      *
        1soru1 says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:40 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465291>
        ~new~

        > Why can’t a manufacturer of L-methylfolate suppliments
        undercut the perscription sellers?

        Because quartering the price is probably not going to quintuple
        the sales.

        Regulated manufacturers quite likely have lower actual
        manufacturing costs, as they have larger scale. They have larger
        scale because most people want and can afford regulated drugs.
        Prices for those drugs are high because people tend to prefer
        not to die in horrible pain, and so place a high value on things
        that prevents that. Most of the money earned from a high price
        goes into marketing to turn that high potential value into a
        high price actually paid. Product development is just a special
        case of this; a drug that works better is easier to market.

        The grey-market sellers have to massively undercut that to make
        it worth their while. They can still make a profit by leeching
        off the regulated sellers marketing.

        I suspect this dynamic effects all the case with cost inflation;
        more gdp means people have more money, so are open to be
        persuaded to spend more on the really valuable stuff. That
        persuasion is expensive.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465151>
          o
            massivefocusedinaction says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:43 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465396>
            ~new~

            Perhaps I’m not asking my question well, why aren’t
            consumers with a prescription able to purchase the $30
            supplements and keep the savings (surely there are some
            cheepskates, I know I’m one). In other words why aren’t the
            supplement makers capturing the expansion they could get by
            competing with the $170 prescription drug makers.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465291>
              +
                Mediocrates says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 11:36 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465441>
                ~new~

                For the specific case of Deplin/Metafolin vs. grocery
                store folate supplements, the answer is basically that
                consumers are are perfectly free to rip up their
                prescription, buy supplements and pocket the difference.

                However, doctors are /not/ free to advise them to do
                this, from the risk-avoidance perspective outlined in
                this post, because if anything goes wrong the patient
                then has a potential malpractice lawsuit. Doctors
                theoretically have a free hand to prescribe off-label,
                suggest supplements or alternative therapies, but
                deviation from standard-of-care opens them up to
                increased liability. The “FDA Approved” stamp serves to
                cover their ass, and since they’re not the ones paying
                the cost difference they have zero-to-negative incentive
                to prescribe cheap supplements. Meanwhile, most patients
                don’t have the savvy or swaggering self-confidence to go
                around ripping up their prescriptions (and arguably they
                don’t directly pay the added cost, either) so they go
                along with it.

                Our illustrious host goes into this at length in Fish –
                Now By Prescription
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/06/15/fish-now-by-prescription/>:

                “Is the public getting any service from LOVAZA™®© and
                DEPLIN™®©?

                I say: yes! The companies behind these two drugs are
                doing God’s work; they are making the world a much
                better place. Their service is /performing the
                appropriate rituals to allow these substances into the
                mainstream medical system/.”

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465396>
              +
                n8chz says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 12:29 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465480>
                ~new~

                The conventional wisdom is that if the particular
                medication you need is available both Rx and OTC, you go
                with Rx if you have Rx coverage and OTC if you don’t.
                But some Rx plans will baffle you with bullshit, leading
                to difficult dilemmas. I don’t know whether methylfolate
                is something likely to be prescribed to a senior
                citizen, but let’s say you have Medicare Part D (D as in
                Donut Hole). If you go Rx, you’ll pay the first
                n-thousand (don’t know what the value of n is these
                days) out of pocket before you’re covered and therefore
                unambiguously in the “choose Rx over OTC” category. But
                if you start with OTC, you’ll never even start paying
                down your first-n-thousand and Rx coverage is infinity
                miles away. Actually, now that I think about it, that
                was just the normal insurance-with-deductible case. If I
                recall right Medicare Donut Hole is even more guesswork
                as the first m-thousand is covered, the next n-thousand
                not, and stuff above m+n thousand covered in theory,
                although I assume penetrating that part of the range of
                outcomes puts you near the top of some database query
                looking for plan subscribers to scrutinize more heavily.
                Actually using an insurance plan (especially health
                related) is basically high-stakes guesswork concerning
                your future needs and risk exposures. If insurance
                mitigates the worst-case outcome, then perhaps having
                additional variables deliberately thrown into your
                personal utility-maximizing algorithm is a worthwhile
                price for that. I’m largely agnostic on that question.

                But the IP rent seekers putting a patent on some aspect
                of inserting methylfolate into a capsule, and the grey
                market entrepreneurs labeling sawdust as methylfolate,
                are not competing in the same market. One is working
                what’s left of the jobs-with-bennies crowd, while the
                other is working the growing
                avoid-talking-to-a-doctor-if-at-all-possible crowd.
                Incomparable products, incomparable consumers, etc. Some
                overlap between the two audiences due to FUD-generating
                algorithms (computer-aided-drafting of contracts), though.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465396>
                  #
                    Loquat says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:37 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465617>
                    ~new~

                    Insurance agent specializing in Medicare here! Part
                    D is a /total clusterfuck/. The cost structure goes
                    like this:

                    Stage 1: Deductible – you pay total cost of your Rx.
                    This is limited by law, but the limit has tended to
                    increase each year. Currently it’s $400, and plans
                    can choose to offer a lesser deductible, or none at all.

                    Stage 2: Initial Coverage – you pay roughly 25% of
                    the total cost of your Rx, or more commonly the plan
                    has a set of 4 or 5 price tiers with a flat copay
                    assigned to each tier, designed to be actuarially
                    equivalent to 25% overall. Depending on what exactly
                    you’re taking and the plan you pick, you can wind up
                    paying next to nothing, or over 50% of the total cost.

                    Stage 3: Donut Hole – you go in this when your total
                    Rx cost for the year reaches the limit, currently
                    $3700, again it tends to increase each year.
                    Originally you did pay total cost here, but
                    legislation was passed to gradually close this, so
                    instead you pay a percentage, gradually decreasing
                    each year until it reaches 25% in 2020.

                    Stage 4: Catastrophic – you reach this if your
                    out-of-pocket cost reaches the limit, currently
                    $4950, tends to increase, etc. You pay either 5% of
                    total cost or a copay of a few dollars, whichever is
                    more.

                    There is no Stage 5 at which you have 100% coverage.

                    Notice that the dollar amounts that get you into and
                    out of the Donut Hole measure different things –
                    getting in counts what you paid plus what your
                    insurance company paid, while getting out counts
                    only what you paid. (Plus 50% of the total cost of
                    brand-name, but not generic, Rx you get in the donut
                    hole, because reasons.)

                    Also, every Part D plan can have a different list of
                    drugs that it covers, though naturally there’s a lot
                    of overlap since they all have to meet Medicare’s
                    coverage requirements. And different plans can cover
                    the same drug in different price tiers. So basically
                    if you take any meds and you’re picking a Part D
                    plan you really should just run your meds through
                    Medicare.gov’s online cost estimator, because
                    estimating your costs under all the available plans
                    by hand is a fool’s game.

                    For some good news, Part D plans can’t kick you off
                    for having expensive drug needs, and there’s an
                    enrollment period every year where people can freely
                    change and cannot be refused coverage.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465480>
          o
            baconbacon says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465569>
            ~new~

                Prices for those drugs are high because people tend to
                prefer not to die in horrible pain, and so place a high
                value on things that prevents that.

            People don’t like dying of thirst, hunger or exposure and
            yet prices aren’t nearly as high for water/food/clothing.

            Price relates to scarcity, and in medicine it is artificial.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465291>
              +
                1soru1 says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:35 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465902>
                ~new~

                Food and clothes are traded worldwide; a 4$ T shirt
                comes from somewhere south of China. A hand-made Aran
                jumper may be more expensive, but not so much as it
                would be if the alternative was going naked.

                Of the expensive stuff, only medicine is traded
                world-wide. For reasons explained by someone else in
                another post, US pricing dominates the market in that.

                So what you have is a bunch of national-level markets,
                where ‘cheap’ means ‘cheaper than more expensive
                competitors’, and ‘within budget’ means ‘within the
                budget we set by looking at the last thing built’. You
                get a bit of stuff at the edges like Americans going to
                Oxford instead of Harvard, or London hiring a German
                tunnel-drilling company, but that’s inherently going to
                be secondary.

                Demand for all these things is more or less arbitrarily
                high, so the question is how efficiently that high
                demand can be translated into actual higher prices.
                Countries with staid, unionised public sectors will
                lazily raise prices slowly, countries with more profit
                driven and hard working private sectors will be more
                efficient at raising prices faster.

                Which is whywhen you look at a graph of ‘% of gdp in
                public sector’ against ‘price of a state of the art jet
                fighter’, it is a straight line sloping downwards.

                Many people had to work 60-hour weeks to get the F-35 to
                cost so much…

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465569>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 12:34 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466234>
                    ~new~

                        Food and clothes are traded worldwide; a 4$ T
                        shirt comes from somewhere south of China.

                    Everything is traded world wide. Food and $4 T
                    shirts, but also every commodity, cars and trucks,
                    airplanes, military equipment. 25% of US doctors are
                    foreign born and medical tourism is a real industry.

                    You might have to be physically present to get a
                    hair cut, but the barber can come from anywhere in
                    the world.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465902>
 4.
    PeterBorah says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:09 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465152>
    ~new~

    I was vaguely aware this sort of thing was true, but didn’t realize
    the extent of it. I agree that this is perplexing and scary.

    In the case of college education, some of this seems likely to be
    due to the zero-sum nature of the “degree prestige” game. A new
    college would be non-prestigious by definition, no matter how good
    the education was. If people are willing to pay $200K to go to a
    top-10 school, no one is able to undercut that by making a new
    top-10 school that costs less.

    That doesn’t apply as obviously to schools lower on the totem poll,
    but I think credentialism might still be important. There are
    actually great new educational tools that are way cheaper: Udacity,
    Coursera, etc. For most people, though, they’re _too_ new and
    different to count as meaningful replacements to normal education,
    even if in reality they totally could substitute. Health care,
    education, and public infrastructure are all fields where a new
    fly-by-night company is not going to be taken very seriously.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Corey says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:48 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465399>
        ~new~

        Definitely true for colleges; increased demand (more students
        both as population increases and more jobs require a degree),
        and supply can’t increase for these credentialism reasons.

        Health care is probably less affected by prestige and more by
        supply bottleneck; most people won’t care too much whether they
        go to Fancy University Hospital or Bob’s Hospital and Muffler
        Shop, but there are only so many white-coated humans around to
        do the work. (Also in healthcare we have lots of market
        failures; Bob’s might be way more expensive than Fancy U but
        there’s no way to know that until the work’s done and you get
        the bills).

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465152>
      *
        Wrong Species says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:29 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465525>
        ~new~

        It’s absolute insanity that schools cost as much as they do. We
        could replace the vast majority of teachers with software and
        still teach children what they need to know, especially in the
        higher grades. Why does each kid have to spend an entire year in
        a class even if they could finish in a semester? Why don’t
        teachers replace lectures in class with those online? Why does
        each kid need to spend five days a week in class if they’re
        spending half that time not doing anything productive?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465152>
          o
            Incurian says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:50 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465537>
            ~new~

            Mild sarcasm below.

            I suspect the answer will be one (or all) of the following:

            Won’t somebody think of the children?!
            You’re a racist!
            Teachers are heroes, why do you hate America?
            If you don’t have a degree in education [and pay dues to the
            teachers’ union] you don’t get an opinion [you child-hating
            nazi].
            Treating children as individuals with different interests
            and abilities contributes to inequality.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465525>
              +
                Luke the CIA Stooge says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 11:35 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465924>
                ~new~

                It does seem Part of the reason the public sector and
                anything attached to it decays so quickly is that the
                public sector seeks out areas tied up with sacred values
                so that any funding cuts will activate the public’s
                taboo tradeoff outrage.

                It’s like all governments inherently want to become
                HPMOR’S ministry of magic where they can employ 3/4th of
                the population in preventing each other from getting
                things done. Give it ten years and dark wizards will
                probably start showing up.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465537>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 11:51 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465928>
                    ~new~

                    It’s always amazed me that public schoolteachers can
                    literally walk out on their students in the middle
                    of the day to go protest in the streets about how
                    they don’t want to have their performance judged
                    based on student outcomes and public sympathy is /on
                    their side/.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465924>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:12 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465933>
                    ~new~

                    Judging performance based on student outcomes has a
                    lot of problems. If you judge by absolute
                    improvement, you get problems when handed students
                    who are good and don’t have a lot of room for
                    improvement. On the other hand, it’s also possible
                    for teachers to be given difficult students who are
                    hard to improve, and the wrong method of judging
                    will screw over those teachers instead. Judging by
                    the absolute value of the outcome rather than
                    improvement, of course, just benefits teachers given
                    good students in the first place.

                    Comparing the amount the students have improved
                    compared to how much they have improved least year
                    by another teacher, of course, leads to problems if
                    the other teacher picked the low hnging fruit.

                    There are also lots of things that teachers don’t
                    control, but which vary between locations and affect
                    the outcome of their students. You don’t exactly get
                    to pick your class size.

                    Not to mention that student outcomes are difficult
                    to measure anyway. Tests are very imperfect measures
                    of how much students have learned, but are how it’s
                    going to be measured.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465924>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:17 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465934>
                    ~new~

                    That is entirely not my point. If they walk out
                    because they’re demanding more money, they still
                    earn public sympathy too.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465924>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 2:47 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465975>
                    ~new~

                    On assessing teachers based on merit: I think this
                    is the main strength of school choice. It’s hard to
                    systematically judge a teacher objectively because
                    there are so many confounding variables, but it’s
                    easy for a parent to decide they don’t like the quality.

                    Often people retort that many parents don’t take
                    enough of an interest for this to be meaningful, but
                    doesn’t that just mean that worst case scenario
                    we’re back where we started? I don’t think even a
                    large population of parents making the exact wrong
                    choices could do much worse than what we currently have.

                    A more general complaint: when people criticize
                    policy proposals, they nearly always forget to ask
                    “compared to what?” Any policy is going to have pros
                    and cons, but criticizing a policy isn’t an exercise
                    in pointing out the cons, it’s about comparing the
                    trade-offs between policies.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465924>
          o
            lemmycaution415 says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:22 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465560>
            ~new~

            On-line classes don’t work very well except for the highly
            motivated.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465525>
              +
                baconbacon says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 2:35 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465570>
                ~new~

                Same with live classes.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465560>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:52 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465580>
                    ~new~

                    Right. The point of education is to create that
                    motivation. That is exactly what we are paying
                    teachers to do.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465570>
                  #
                    Wrong Species says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:15 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465599>
                    ~new~

                    You think teachers are effective at motivating
                    students? I’ll resist the urge to make a sarcastic
                    quip and note that I simply don’t agree with that.
                    Anyways the problem from online education comes from
                    expecting students to work on it at home when they
                    have all their various distractions. If they are in
                    a school environment and are promised that if they
                    finish early they can be done, then they’ll be much
                    more motivated to do their work.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465570>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:22 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465604>
                    ~new~

                        You think teachers are effective at motivating
                        students?

                    Same as with any other type of job I’ve ever
                    encountered: some are, some aren’t.

                    In fact, this situation isn’t uncommon: teacher A
                    can motivate student X but not student Y. Teacher B
                    can motivate student Y but not student X.

                        I’ll resist the urge to make a sarcastic quip
                        and note that I simply don’t agree with that.

                    Well, I can tell that your position on this comes
                    from a completely dispassionate review of the
                    available evidence. /s

                        If they are in a school environment and are
                        promised that if they finish early they can be
                        done, then they’ll be much more motivated to do
                        their work.

                    You may not realize this, but there’s this new thing
                    on the market called a “mobile phone”. It’s like a
                    late 90’s-era laptop that fits in your pocket and
                    has better internet connectivity. If you try to
                    confiscate them to prevent kids from goofing off and
                    flagrantly cheating, some of their parents will
                    raise a mighty racket and the administrators will
                    take their side because they have authority over
                    teachers but not parents.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465570>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:42 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465622>
                    ~new~

                        If they are in a school environment and are
                        promised that if they finish early they can be done,

                    I never got this deal in school!

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465570>
                  #
                    lemmycaution415 says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 6:48 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465750>
                    ~new~

                    “same as live classes”

                    not really, 90% of people doing on-line learning
                    classes drop out

                    https://erickson.edu/blog/90-of-students-fail-online-classes

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465570>
                  #
                    Wrong Species says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 6:53 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465752>
                    ~new~

                    @wysinwygymmv

                    Even if you were right that computers could never
                    replace live lectures for the majority of
                    students(as if they are paying attention now), then
                    we could still save a lot of money just by letting
                    the highly motivated go this route. And if students
                    using their phone was such a problem that teachers
                    aren’t allowed to take them away, then how is that
                    any different than now?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465570>
          o
            Spookykou says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:17 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465600>
            ~new~

            It sounds like you are talking about k-12 and my
            understanding is that the primary purpose of k-12 is keeping
            kids in a classroom for five days a week.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465525>
              +
                Wrong Species says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:50 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465751>
                ~new~

                The cynic in means says yes but I don’t think this is
                true. Most people genuinely believe that students are
                learning so much and the only reason they don’t learn
                more is because there isn’t enough funding. Of course,
                for younger kids, it makes sense to double up as a
                daycare but not for high schoolers. If we really thought
                it was necessary, at the very least we could give them
                more free time inside of school instead of wasting their
                time with busy work.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465600>
                  #
                    Luke the CIA Stooge says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 11:54 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465930>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t think anyone genuinely believes this, I
                    think alot of people genuinely believe that that is
                    what their supposed to believe and that if you
                    challenge the ability of education to save the
                    wicked and miserable your a bad person like Peter Thiel.
                    I suspect people support “education” as a sacred
                    value because your racist if you don’t or your a bad
                    parent if you don’t or your a bad kid who betrayed
                    everyone whose helped you if you don’t or your
                    unamerican if you don’t, but I think most people
                    realise that outside of hard skills (how to weld,
                    how to keep do the books for a business, etc.)
                    education is pretty nebulous and hard to Destin
                    guise from just growing up.

                    Like I’ve just completed a philosophy and English
                    degree and I genuinely can’t tell what if anything
                    I’ve learned that I can attribute to the degree vs
                    everything else I’ve been reading or doing for the
                    past four years. I feel like my one fourth year
                    seminar on Hobbes really influenced my thinking and
                    another Political philosophy class got me to take
                    traditional values/values that aren’t mine seriously
                    but just looking at the kind of stuff I would read
                    in my spare time it seems like i would have gotten
                    to bother of those on my own.
                    Again most of the effects of “education” are
                    indestinguishable from just growing up.

                    Maybe there’s a large subset of people that won’t
                    grow at all without outside influence? But then what
                    separated that population from those that won’t grow
                    even with education and parents pushing them?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465751>
 5.
    Raghu Parthasarathy <https://eighteenthelephant.wordpress.com> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:15 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465154>
    ~new~

    I’ve wondered about this issue as well, though not as thoroughly as
    you. Two things that often come to mind that aren’t directly
    addressed in your six possible resolutions to the puzzle:

    (1) At least in higher education, and probably in medicine, the
    number of people employed by institutions has grown tremendously. At
    universities, for example, the number of administrators has grown by
    well over 100% in the past decades, and in general the number of
    people not directly involved in teaching or research is vast. This
    drives costs up, though it doesn’t lead to a rise in university
    salaries. Of course, this doesn’t solve the puzzle, and it begs the
    question of what has driven this increase in personnel. I don’t
    know, except that there’s probably a much higher expectation of
    “support” services than there used to be. (This isn’t to say this is
    good or bad.) Also, these support people are perhaps ones who in
    times past would be employed in agriculture or manufacturing —
    things that are much less labor intensive than they used to be.

    (2) Have the real costs of “real” necessities gone down? Certainly
    this is the case for food, which is vastly cheaper than it was
    decades ago. A consequence may be that the “excess” money gets
    absorbed by things like higher education, health care, etc., without
    much complaint.

    Combining these: it’s nice to have cushy levels of support; there’s
    a willing pool of people who want to have jobs in these areas;
    there’s money to burn. Result: we spend more on education, health
    care, etc., though the salaries per person in these areas don’t go up.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Civilis says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:24 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465379>
        ~new~

        I see your second point as a possible explanation as well; I
        haven’t thought this all through, but a quick pass seems to make
        sense. We spend a lot less of our income than we used to on
        food, clothing and household goods even as our income has gone
        up. The extra money’s going to go somewhere.

        People now have extra money to spend on things. Housing, college
        education, and medical care are things where the supply hasn’t
        increased significantly, so the costs for the supply that exists
        will necessarily go up. In the case of housing, the supply of
        good housing hasn’t increased significantly to keep up with
        demand. In the case of health care, increasing life expediencies
        and expectations about end-of-life care increased the demand.

        Why are colleges spending money on extra administrators and
        luxuries? Because they have the money. The school’s going to be
        full either way, so why not charge what the market can bear?
        Colleges aren’t competing based on cost (at least until you get
        into the for-profit sector).

        Primary and secondary education are a bit more complicated. This
        theory doesn’t explain why urban school expenditures are so high
        compared to the rest of the country, but increasingly the
        biggest determinator of where people with kids want to live is
        “how good are the schools?” This means that that’s what they’re
        going to be nagging their local governments about. If your
        chances of getting re-elected depend on school funding more than
        anything else, you’re going to fund schools. I guess this could
        drive up costs for poorer school districts as well, as they’re
        still pulling from the same pool of teachers and administrators.
        I can’t quite reconcile this with ‘teacher salaries are flat’,
        unless the increase is in non-salary costs like pensions.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
          o
            cassander says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:12 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465416>
            ~new~

            >People now have extra money to spend on things. Housing,
            college education, and medical care are things where the
            supply hasn’t increased significantly, so the costs for the
            supply that exists will necessarily go up.

            the supply// of those things HAS increased though. we send
            far more people to college, buy bigger houses, and get way
            more medical treatments

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465379>
              +
                Civilis says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 1:37 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465531>
                ~new~

                Perhaps I should have phrased it as ‘supply increase has
                not (and can not) keep up with demand’. Everyone can
                have food sufficiency, TV, a car and a cell phone. Not
                everyone can send their kid to a top tier college or
                live in a top tier school district. Some colleges will
                be at the top of the pile, and some areas will be better
                to live in than others.

                If you’ve got extra money, buying another TV or a more
                expensive car doesn’t seem as useful on a long term
                basis as moving to a better neighborhood or pushing your
                kid to a better college.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465416>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:11 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465550>
                    ~new~

                    My point is that I don’t think we’re bidding up a
                    fixed supply, we’re actively buying more stuff. the
                    average house today is nearly twice
                    <https://www.aei.org/publication/todays-new-homes-are-1000-square-feet-larger-than-in-1973-and-living-space-per-person-has-doubled-over-last-41-years/>
                    the size is was 40 years ago, and has fewer people
                    living in it. In 1950, medical care consisted of a
                    few wonder drugs, some surgical procedures, and some
                    nurses to keep you comfortable while you died. We’re
                    cramming tons more stuff into old boxes, then acting
                    surprised that they’re getting bigger.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465531>
                  #
                    cheesechoker says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:54 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465947>
                    ~new~

                    > Not everyone can send their kid to a top tier
                    college or live in a top tier school district.

                    That argument applies to positional goods, but not
                    every good/service experiencing cost disease is
                    positional. I think education and housing are (at
                    least partly), but medicine and transportation
                    infrastructure are not.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465531>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:57 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465949>
                    ~new~

                    I think medicine is, at least more than you might
                    suspect.

                    The second a new treatment is invented, it is
                    expected to become available to everyone in society.
                    Prisons are being sued by human rights organizations
                    for not providing 100k+ treatments for Hepatitis C,
                    for free, to their inmates.

                    Everyone expects to have access to the best medical
                    care, and the idea that certain types of care might
                    not be available to certain people strikes most as
                    morally reprehensible.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465531>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 2:50 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465976>
                    ~new~

                    Matt M: That’s a really good point. Have you thought
                    of any potential solutions to this problem (that is,
                    of people having stupid moral opinions)?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465531>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 5:30 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466018>
                    ~new~

                    I’m the wrong person to ask. My solution to every
                    problem is the same. Abolish the government. People
                    can either afford stuff or they can’t. If they
                    can’t, they go without it. And that doesn’t bother
                    me one bit.

                    Perhaps this qualifies as a stupid moral opinion?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465531>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:58 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466106>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t think it’s a stupid moral opinion, merely an
                    unpractical one. Unfortunately so, since I share
                    that opinion. The hard part, it seems to me, is
                    getting people to go along with it. It also seems to
                    me that the other side has a big advantage wrt
                    propaganda, because they don’t necessarily feel to
                    the need to be truthful.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465531>
      *
        Corey says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:49 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465400>
        ~new~

        That’s basically McArdle’s position on health care costs – if we
        want to spend 15% of the economy on health care (and since we
        are, by revealed preference we must want to), who is anyone to
        criticize? (Not that I agree…)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
      *
        Edward Scizorhands says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:21 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465426>
        ~new~

        Building anything where people already are is more expensive,
        and that includes building schools and hospitals. NIMBYism and
        giving 100 different parties veto power over things getting
        built is often a good way to protect property rights, but it
        also means that a lot of things never happen.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
      *
        Atlemar says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:38 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465533>
        ~new~

        Yes, there’s more support, but also the expectations go up.
        Scott gave the example of hospitals that had everybody in one
        large room, but now put everybody in private rooms. Are we given
        the choice now? Well, were we given the choice back then? The
        comfort improved and the cost increased and we took the
        tradeoff, maybe not always individually but collectively. Now we
        have a choice between private and semi-private rooms and there
        are a ton of people who would not accept a semi-private room.
        Hence the facilities costs are larger and it probably requires
        more staff to supervise the same number of patients.

        A lot of the increase is probably little things. Some public
        infrastructure has a “1 percent for art” requirement; that
        wasn’t there when the New York subway was built. Freeway
        overpasses are now decorated (which I think is a good thing, as
        people will be looking at them for 30 years). And there are a
        lot of private construction consultants hired on any given
        project: consultants to handle public outreach, requirements for
        some amount of design and study on multiple alternatives for
        every route.

        For subways, I’d love to see two kilometers picked for being as
        comparable as possible from the US and elsewhere, and then a
        study that drills down into line-item costs as far as possible.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
          o
            houseboatonstyxb says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 3:12 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465854>
            ~new~

            @ Atlemar
            /Now we have a choice between private and semi-private rooms
            and there are a ton of people who would not accept a
            semi-private room. /

            Isn’t there a safety factor also? The more patients sharing
            a bathroom, the more contagion. The more patients in a room,
            the more chance of foul-ups: the patient gets the wrong
            medicine, or the wrong patient gets the amputation.

            Plus the stress, and decreased accuracy, ln trying to talk
            to the doctor over the sound of the other patient’s television.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465533>
      *
        EarthSeaSky says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:12 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465553>
        ~new~

            Also, these support people are perhaps ones who in times
            past would be employed in agriculture or manufacturing —
            things that are much less labor intensive than they used to be.

        Good thought. I’d love to see a graph showing the total number
        of people employed in a given profession by year.

        The more I think about it, the more plausible this suggestion
        seems to me. I’m reminded of everyone running to one side of a
        ship as it sinks. The jobs aren’t in agriculture anymore, they
        aren’t in manufacturing anymore, and everyone’s getting a
        college degree – guess I’ll become a medical code filer.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
      *
        Tracy W says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:33 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465701>
        ~new~

        There are some legitimate reasons for some of the rise in admin
        staff at universities – everyone needs IT support nowadays.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
          o
            Matt M says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:23 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465726>
            ~new~

            A rise in IT support should, in theory, roughly correspond
            to reductions in say, accountants adding things up by hand,
            or secretaries writing out documents and filing them away,
            or whatever.

            A large amount of university support staff today is things
            like title IX diversity counselors. Black holes of cost
            devoid of any real value whatsoever.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465701>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 7:23 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465769>
                ~new~

                It’s also from universities hiring 6 people and keeping
                them all half-busy as a result of bureaucratic
                empire-building and social status (more underlings =
                more prestige) competition between deans and department
                heads. In the years my wife worked for the University of
                California, she mentioned seeing a lot of that.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465726>
                  #
                    LCL says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 9:51 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465805>
                    ~new~

                    Also: hiring their own recent graduates to various
                    support roles, in order to inflate employment
                    numbers for recent graduates. Not the biggest
                    factor, but has taken place at every program I’ve seen.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465769>
              +
                Deiseach says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 12:42 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465939>
                ~new~

                /reductions in say, …secretaries writing out documents
                and filing them away, or whatever./

                They say that some day that, with all this new computer
                technology, we’re going to get the paperless office!
                I’ve been hearing that for fifteen years or more.
                Meanwhile, I’ve just been handed a 46-page new policy
                that has come in from one of our overseeing bodies and I
                have to make two photocopies and file them away in
                different files 🙂

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465726>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:10 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466254>
                    ~new~

                    As best I remember, the main job of secretaries in
                    academic departments when I first became a professor
                    was typing and retyping things, largely things
                    written by professors.

                    That job was mostly eliminated by the shift to
                    professors typing and revising their own documents
                    on word processors. One would think that would have
                    sharply decreased the number of secretaries. But it
                    doesn’t seem to have happened–if anything the opposite.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465939>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:00 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466399>
                    ~new~

                    @ DF. There certainly has been a reduction of
                    secretaries in private industry. Well they are
                    called admins now. Yes they used to do typing, but
                    also a lot of filing too. Neither one is needed
                    anymore. It seems only VPs have admins now — I think
                    what they mostly do is make travel arrangements,
                    since the muckety mucks are constantly traveling.
                    And I suppose set up conference rooms for meetings
                    and spend a lot of time getting two or more muckety
                    mucks in contact, since all of them are probably on
                    the road.

                    It is nice to see that there are some productivity
                    benefits to a highly computerized office — hopefully
                    someday it will spread to academia.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465939>
      *
        DavidS says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 6:55 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465893>
        ~new~

        On (2), this is probably just me revealing my economic ignorance
        but my instinctive reading would be that presumably inflation is
        related to the average increase in costs of things, so a story
        that certain things have inflation-busting prices rises could
        equally be reported as “staples such as food, as well as certain
        other things such as technology, have become radically cheaper”.
        Though I’m not sure if that works.

        The way I’d instinctively want to model it is ‘median salary
        person used to work 20 hours a week to pay for food, 10 for
        housing, 5 for education/health and 5 for other fun stuff. Now
        it’s only 2 hours a week for food but 20 for housing and 15 for
        education/health, and 10 for fun stuff. This is 47 hours but
        they still only work 40 so they’re all in debt’

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465154>
 6.
    Daniel Frank <http://www.Danfrank.ca> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:18 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465155>
    ~new~

    Any thoughts on how women being integrated in the workforce and
    consequently, leaving fields such as education and healthcare might
    have influenced costs?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        aldi says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:00 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465173>
        ~new~

        http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465167

        women were always in the workforce, only recently are they
        beginning to see the labor they have always undertaken
        appropriately valued

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465155>
          o
            eqdw says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:12 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465204>
            ~new~

            I think that’s his point? If fifty years ago, women were
            doing unvalued care and hospitality work, and today they’re
            doing the same work but getting paid a fair wage, that would
            look like a massive increase in the cost of care and
            hospitality, with no other change.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465173>
              +
                Corey says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:50 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465401>
                ~new~

                Keynes: “If a man marries his maid, all else being
                equal, GDP goes down” 🙂

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465204>
              +
                albertborrow says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 11:20 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465425>
                ~new~

                Why would we see a near constant, linear increase?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465204>
                  #
                    aldi says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:25 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466376>
                    ~new~

                    the transition is smoothed by certain industries
                    shedding their gendered attitude sooner than others,
                    by certain communities providing the amenities
                    needed for women to work, by the noise generated by
                    the labor of women being decreasingly undervalued.

                    women still aren’t getting paid a fair wage (all
                    fields considered), not by any studies’ conclusions,
                    but the consensus seems to be that we are getting closer

                    but women weren’t just aiding care and hospitality.
                    pre-ww2 especially, they were unpaid ancillary labor
                    alongside their husbands, especially in the
                    military, mining, healthcare or agriculture
                    industries. Or, with less economic significance,
                    acting as their husband’s unpaid secretary in more
                    white-collar jobs. And those are just the
                    first-order effects.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465425>
                  #
                    The Nybbler says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:05 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466388>
                    ~new~

                        Or, with less economic significance, acting as
                        their husband’s unpaid secretary in more
                        white-collar jobs.

                    Unpaid? Did they not reap the benefits of his salary?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465425>
                  #
                    FacelessCraven says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:16 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466392>
                    ~new~

                    @aldi – “women still aren’t getting paid a fair wage
                    (all fields considered), not by any studies’
                    conclusions…”

                    If this were true, why not go to one of those fields
                    that pay women an unfair wage, hire /only/ women at
                    a wage 10% above the standard unfair female wage,
                    and outcompete everyone else due to the significant
                    increase in cost-effectiveness?

                    Blacks used to suffer outright, explicit wage
                    discrimination. If I recall, the result was that
                    white workers organized specifically to keep blacks
                    from taking all the jobs and/or driving down wages,
                    as the black workers were obviously just as good and
                    considerably cheaper. Why doesn’t the same thing
                    happen with male and female workers in the present?

                    Also, nybbler’s question.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465425>
      *
        Corey says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:39 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465444>
        ~new~

        There’s going to be some influence; when women were allowed into
        few jobs other than teacher, that acted as a subsidy for
        schools. Though that effect would probably pre-date the big cost
        increases (it would have petered out by the 1980s or so, right?)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465155>
 7.
    BBA says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:22 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465157>
    ~new~

    For most of these, you can handwave it as the effect of increased
    government regulation + spending, back in the day when men were men
    and we didn’t need no stinkin’ OSHA it was much cheaper.

    But what the hell is going on with subway construction costing 10
    times more here than in Europe? As much as Americans like to
    complain about out-of-control government, in Europe the situation is
    much worse, and yet somehow they’re still building stuff cheaper
    even with mandatory vacation and without at-will employment. I just
    don’t get it.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        jhertzlinger says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:44 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465161>
        ~new~

        One possible theory: The sort of people who keep costs down in
        the public sector in Europe are working for Silicon Valley in
        the US.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465157>
          o
            aldi says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:59 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465171>
            ~new~

            In fact, some of them are leaving those european
            institutions for the lucrative millenarian jobs in various
            silicon locales

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465161>
          o
            scriptifaber says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 9:41 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465343>
            ~new~

            I recently read a very similar hypothesis from a certain
            dark contrarian school of political theory. I might not
            agree with much of their thoughts but I’m more than happy to
            steal their lingo. They called places like Singapore and
            Silicon Valley “/IQ Shredders”/, as they attract large
            amounts of high IQ adults to move there, and have extremely
            low birth rates. The argument was that these places skim
            high IQ talent from the available talent pool but don’t
            replace the talent in future generations, instead generating
            immense material wealth. I think its an interesting idea,
            and I’m suspect its true to a certain degree, but I’d
            hesitate to ascribe it total blame for the variance in
            costs. It seems more likely to be one factor of many.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465161>
              +
                NatashaRostova <http://www.cardinallemon.com> says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:59 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465407>
                ~new~

                Grand narrative arguments are notoriously hard to even
                slightly confirm. Having said that, I’m pretty sure my
                team at (top 5 tech company) could launch and run a
                school better than almost any current school, at a much
                cheaper cost. In fact, look at the Silicon Valley rocket
                companies. They have an idea, are ruthlessly smart and
                efficient, and hire and properly manage rocket scientists.

                If Facebook or Amazon wanted to disrupt high school
                education or hosiptitals, could they? Can google go
                create a tech startup hospital in Pacific Heights,
                trying experimental approaches and choosing their
                patients? Can Amazon go to downtown Seattle and disrupt
                the current traffic dynamics with their own new
                solutions? Can the Facebook guys who build brilliant
                machine learning models for spatial dynamics search for
                the best ways to build a new subway at a cheap price?

                It’s a compelling idea. All of our most profound
                benefits and cost savings go through the tech tunnel.
                It’s just that, at the moment, a good chunk of that
                benefits our life in terms of watching machines beat
                humans at Go, Facebook image classification algorithms,
                and cheap Amazon deliveries. When humans tend to prefer
                good family health and education.

                Could it be that the smart people are leaving those
                fields to work at Amazon?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465343>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:15 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465421>
                    ~new~

                        If Facebook or Amazon wanted to disrupt high
                        school education or hosiptitals, could they?

                    Hospitals, maybe. Not education.

                    Education is not something that’s amenable to
                    technological solutions. It involves an
                    interpersonal relationship between student and
                    teacher. Students won’t learn anything unless they
                    find some personal connection to the material, and
                    that pretty much always comes through a personal
                    connection to a teacher. That personal connection is
                    what motivates the student to do work that they’d
                    rather not do, and almost everything worthwhile
                    about education consists in making students do stuff
                    they’d rather not do.

                    (In other cases, students learn by forming a
                    personal connection to the material without a human
                    intermediary, but then those are autodidacts and we
                    know they’re pretty rare.)

                    Technology doesn’t help. When a teacher gives a
                    laptop to a student, he is putting the most
                    distracting possible physical device between himself
                    and the student. That makes it harder to form the
                    personal connection that will motivate the student
                    to learn, not easier.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    Cliff says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:32 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465437>
                    ~new~

                    Your evidence being what?? I don’t have to have a
                    personal connection to something to learn it, so I
                    think your premise is wrong. By the way I heard
                    about a program where the classes are basically
                    taught by computers and the teachers just say what
                    their tablets tell them to do and it apparently has
                    so far done as well or better than actual teachers
                    for like $100/year or something? (In India maybe?)

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    wysinwygymmv says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:48 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465450>
                    ~new~

                        Your evidence being what??

                    First-hand observation.

                        I don’t have to have a personal connection to
                        something to learn it, so I think your premise
                        is wrong.

                    You’re able to learn something without being
                    interested in it or otherwise having no motivation
                    to do so? I’m skeptical.

                    I mean, maybe if I challenged you on something like
                    this, you’d be like “well I’m not interested in the
                    differences between Volkswagen carburetors
                    year-to-year, but just to show you, I’ll learn the
                    shit out of it!” And then maybe you would. But your
                    motivation would be to prove me wrong, and that
                    would make me an effective teacher, our
                    interpersonal relationship having provided you with
                    the motivation you needed to learn the subject.

                        By the way I heard about a program where the
                        classes are basically taught by computers and
                        the teachers just say what their tablets tell
                        them to do and it apparently has so far done as
                        well or better than actual teachers for like
                        $100/year or something?

                    If your metric is “getting a certain score on a test
                    that’s been rigged to pass as many students as
                    possible despite flagging literacy rates and
                    innumeracy” then sure. If your metric is “achieving
                    literacy, numeracy, and general competence in
                    contributing to society,” then I am skeptical.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    NatashaRostova <http://www.cardinallemon.com> says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:43 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465488>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t mean disrupt education as in “Create a shiny
                    new app to help kids learn math.” More like, try a
                    ton of different experiments, many of which require
                    massive capital expenditure on structures, teachers,
                    and new methods of attracting top teaching talent in
                    different ways. Measure everything over 1,5,10 years
                    (etc). Maybe experiment with finding high achieving
                    future engineer type students early and double down
                    on investing in them.

                    Have funding tied to success, eliminate things that
                    don’t work early on. Measure student outcomes
                    ruthlessly. (etc).

                    Our current system is basically “Hire low talent
                    people to teach. If they are bad pay them more. Make
                    them teach all students in basically the same
                    method. Measure outcome by how they score on a
                    standardized math test. If they score poorly take
                    away their money, but then also try to find ways to
                    give them more money.” (Exaggerating for rhetorical
                    purposes, but this is close to truth)

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    PeterBorah says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:27 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465565>
                    ~new~

                    > Education is not something that’s amenable to
                    technological solutions.

                    I think your definition of “technological solution”
                    is too narrow. Even if it’s true that a personal
                    connection with a teacher is critical, it is
                    possible to have personal connections with teachers
                    in the context of a technological solution.

                    Examples of hypotheses an experimental education
                    project could test:

                    1) Maybe we should start the school day later, as
                    every doctor in the universe recommends.
                    2) Maybe there are different aspects to the
                    “interpersonal relationship” that could be factored
                    in a different way. For example, you could try
                    having the teacher rotate through 1-on-1 or small
                    group meetings with kids, while otherwise the kids
                    use recorded lectures or interactive apps or just
                    plain old books for learning the actual content. Or
                    you could see if going back to a single teacher for
                    the whole school day works better than the
                    separation by field that current schools use.
                    3) You could A/B test class lengths to see if it’s
                    better to have longer or shorter classes. Or you
                    could try the block scheduling thing some
                    experimental schools do where you take one class at
                    a time for a month, and then do something else the
                    next month.
                    4) You could try giving the kids more options for
                    the classes they take. This could happen by, for
                    instance, providing transportation to other
                    locations when necessary, or having specialist
                    teachers who teach the same class across multiple
                    schools (each of which wouldn’t be able to justify
                    the salary on its own).

                    Those are just off the top of my head, I’m sure a
                    proper brainstorming session or literature review
                    could turn up dozens more.

                    The key to any of these would be having good
                    visibility into the actual effects the interventions
                    have. We all agree that tests are not a great way to
                    measure things, so have personal interviews with the
                    kids and/or parents and/or teachers, have some sort
                    of online upvote/downvote system, or come up with
                    another way to get visibility. Probably the effects
                    will differ based on location, etc, so it’s probably
                    important to have some degree of federalism, so long
                    as there is plenty of support and visibility for the
                    value of escaping inertia.

                    If Google was working on this, I have no doubt that
                    they could do 10x better with the same money that
                    public schools currently use.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    lemmycaution415 says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:32 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465567>
                    ~new~

                    There are 3.7 million full-time-equivalent
                    elementary and secondary school teachers in the US.
                    Good luck filling up the ranks with Stanford grads.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    Spookykou says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:43 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465625>
                    ~new~

                    wysinwygymmv I think you are discounting the
                    possibility for technological gains in the classroom
                    a little too much here.

                    First, teachers do not spend all day every day
                    trying to actively engage with students. Depending
                    on the quality/youth of the teacher, a decent amount
                    of every school day is going to be spent working
                    individually/in small groups. This time is currently
                    drastically under utilized, and I will agree that
                    for some students it is unlikely that any technology
                    will be sufficient to make this time useful. Not all
                    students are the same, and I have had the good
                    fortune to teach many students who had their own
                    interests and passions and who would be happy to
                    pursue those interests if given the tools to do so,
                    sadly the Texas state history textbook isn’t the
                    best tool.

                    While I agree giving a kid a laptop connected to the
                    internet is worse than giving them a book during
                    these periods of time, it seems to me that there is
                    some space between book and unfettered access to the
                    internet where technology might create a better
                    option for individual reading/study time. Something
                    as simple as a smart book that can offer live built
                    in dictionary/pronunciation/translation support
                    would be seriously beneficial. The problem of
                    trivial inconveniences is a serious one, especially
                    for a struggling ESL student who could just give up
                    and pass notes instead.

                    Going back to, students are different. If you have
                    good tools and motivated self learners this
                    increases the time that the teacher has to focus on
                    students who need more of the direct one on one
                    interaction for their time in school to be time well
                    spent.

                    I think a lot of the ways technology is currently
                    being implemented into the classroom are
                    counterproductive/neutral but that is not the same
                    as there being no room for technology to improve
                    education.

                    I am speaking mainly to elementary school as that is
                    where I have experience, but I would think that the
                    proportion of students better able to take advantage
                    of better self study tools would increase in the
                    higher grades if anything.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    NatashaRostova <http://www.cardinallemon.com> says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:47 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465672>
                    ~new~

                    >There are 3.7 million full-time-equivalent
                    elementary and secondary school teachers in the US.
                    Good luck filling up the ranks with Stanford grads.

                    It’s not just about Stanford grads. The point is
                    properly matching talent-talent. I had a great,
                    truly great, Caltech trained physics teacher at my
                    totally mediocre highschool. Every year he got to
                    teach 2-4 high potential kids, and the rest were
                    average. There is nothing in the world wrong with
                    being average morally. But it’s not a huge use of
                    resources to have average students learning from a
                    top 0.01% teacher.

                    I know that sounds bad, but the point is the
                    students don’t meaningfully learn from him in the
                    way his talents let him teach. If you instead had a
                    more hierarchical structure, where students were
                    filtered by IQ, you could match students-teachers
                    more efficiently. (basically how the university
                    system works).

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    houseboatonstyxb says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 4:19 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465876>
                    ~new~

                    @ wysinwygymmv
                    [plucked from context] /“[J]ust to show you, I’ll
                    learn the shit out of it!” And then maybe you would.
                    But your motivation would be to prove me wrong, and
                    that would make me an effective teacher, our
                    interpersonal relationship having provided you with
                    the motivation you needed to learn the subject./

                    Briefly,,,,

                    Imagine half a dozen Scotts each running an
                    SSC-cloned blog dedicated to a particular course of
                    study — following a textbook chapter by chapter, if
                    necessary. We’re all effective teachers of each
                    other: motivating, critiqueing each other’s ideas,
                    bringing in outside/advanced material.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    Deiseach says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:49 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465945>
                    ~new~

                    /By the way I heard about a program where the
                    classes are basically taught by computers and the
                    teachers just say what their tablets tell them to do/

                    Does that class include students with learning
                    disabilities, physical disabilities and behavioural
                    problems? If you can stream classes by ability so
                    you get the self-motivated disciplined kids who are
                    able to use the equipment and learn from it and
                    don’t need any kind of assistance and who got their
                    breakfast in the morning and will get a meal in the
                    evening when they get home from school and they
                    aren’t wondering if their parents are going to have
                    a meltdown and a screaming row when they’re trying
                    to do their homework, it’ll work fine.

                    Not every single pupil is like that, though, and
                    that’s our problem: what do you do with the ones who
                    need help? We tried special schools and educational
                    theory moved against those. Do we go back to them?
                    What’s the solution?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
                  #
                    aldi says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 6:04 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466351>
                    ~new~

                    All of the people in this comment tree need to learn
                    about the Regional Educational Laboratories and
                    comparable organizations in other countries — they
                    have been fruitfully using statistics based findings
                    to ~disrupt~ education for decades. They are often
                    comprised of the top-flight grads you are talking
                    about. This is all already being done, though it may
                    be quickly undone with DeVos at the helm.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465407>
      *
        Jesse E says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:38 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465183>
        ~new~

        I’d make the argument that part of the reason, not all of it,
        but a decent chunk of the reason for the lower costs is the lack
        of at-will employment, mandatory vacation, strong unions, etc.

        Basically, the unions know they’ll always be around. No Spanish
        government, to name a random European country, is going to
        institute right to work or try to defang unions completely.
        Sure, they might make it harder to strike or reform some of the
        labor laws, but you’ll see nothing like the US.

        OTOH, if you’re a union leader in the US, you never know when
        after an election, your state is going to be Wisconsin’d. So,
        get what you can and provide for your union members until you
        can’t. When it’s basically all out war between both sides, don’t
        be surprised when one side takes all the spoils it can while it
        can, while on the other hand, even if labor and management don’t
        agree on everything in Europe, labor doesn’t believe the 1st
        goal of management is to destroy them so it’s easier to make a
        reasonable deal.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465157>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:54 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465192>
            ~new~

            I agree, and would add that the same culture that likely
            influences union behaviour likely influences business
            behaviour. The USA has a remarkable history and continued
            practice of union-busting that seems a little absurd to
            outside eyes.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465183>
              +
                J says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 3:10 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465225>
                ~new~

                I do not get the impression that European labor unions
                are better behaved
                <http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/07/powerful-france-labour-unions-160725081316109.html>
                than the ones in the US.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465192>
                  #
                    Aapje says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 9:10 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465325>
                    ~new~

                    There are immense differences between European
                    countries
                    <https://www.cbs.nl/en-gb/news/2015/18/few-strike-days-in-2014>
                    (see the chart at the bottom). France has 19 times
                    more strike days per 1000 employees than The
                    Netherlands, for example.

                    A very interesting data point is that Sweden has a
                    fraction of the strikes that Norway and Denmark
                    have. So you can see that the differences are truly
                    national, rather than regional.

                    PS. Note that the tendency to strike is not the only
                    way in which union/employer relationships differ
                    between countries.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465225>
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:47 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465347>
        ~new~

        American litigation? Is it harder to acquire land or rights to
        build on it because of increased court cases about “not in my
        backyard” and “the noise of your diggers kept my cat awake all
        night, I’m going to court to sue you for infliction of distress
        and animal cruelty”?

        I have no idea. I know we got the EU to pay for all our
        infrastructure work, back in the balmy days of the Celtic Tiger,
        but maybe America is already so built up by our standards, it is
        more expensive and difficult than working from a green field
        situation where there was nothing there ever before.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465157>
          o
            BBA says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:00 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465459>
            ~new~

            We’re not talking about rural Ireland though, we’re talking
            about Paris, which is plenty built-up and obsessed with
            maintaining its historic character. And they still can build
            cheaper and faster than New York.

            Then again, France is just strange all around. “It works in
            practice but nobody’s been able to make it work in theory.”

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465347>
              +
                Deiseach says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:03 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465716>
                ~new~

                Maybe they have the streets cleared to work because all
                the lorry drivers on strike
                <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-148698/French-truckers-strike-threatens-chaos.html>
                at the ferry ports are not moving through? 😉

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465459>
 8.
    skybrian says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:38 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465159>
    ~new~

    This seems like an plausible theory:

    “Most American cities find themselves caught in the Growth Ponzi
    Scheme. We experience a modest, short term illusion of wealth in
    exchange for enormous, long term liabilities.” [1]

    Does that argument generalize? Pensions seem like a logical place to
    look, particularly in the public sector – many cities today are
    struggling to pay overly generous pension plans. It can happen to
    corporations too – for example, GM before the financial crisis was
    talked about as a health insurance business that happens to make
    automobiles.

    It also seems plausible that young companies (with mostly young
    workers) have an advantage. Maybe we should ask why things were so
    cheap back then?

    Where else are there long-term liabilities that were put off?

    [1] https://www.strongtowns.org/the-growth-ponzi-scheme/

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Douglas Knight says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:58 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465170>
        ~new~

        No, that’s saying exactly the opposite. It’s saying that school
        costs a lot more than we admit, making the real problem even
        worse than Scott’s post. Also, school buildings are often not
        counted as school spending.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465159>
          o
            Doug S. says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:00 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465680>
            ~new~

            No, it’s saying that the low costs of the past were a lie.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465170>
              +
                Douglas Knight says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:16 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465721>
                ~new~

                Yeah, I guess that’s what the 4th paragraph is saying.
                But there is a lie today, as well, to the extent that
                defined benefit pensions still exist. Anyway, it would
                be simpler to say: much of the current budget is going
                to retired teachers. This is a simple, concrete
                statistic that ought to be available.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465680>
      *
        Incurian says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:10 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465469>
        ~new~

        Isn’t that what happened in Greece?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465159>
 9.
    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:39 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465160>
    ~new~

    The graph “Percentage Increase in Consumer Prices Since the First
    Quarter of 1978” has to be showing nominal prices, not inflation
    adjusted prices, since it shows CPI going up by 279%. So the figure
    for Tuition & Fees on that graph of 1,225% is also not inflation
    adjusted. So I don’t think your reference to inflation adjusted
    college cost dectupling or “Inflation-adjusted cost of a university
    education was something like $2000/year in 1980. Now it’s closer to
    $20,000/year” can be correct.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Scott Alexander says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:11 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465176>
        ~new~

        I’m taking the “dectupling” claim from the site I link to there,
        not the graph. The site says it cost $1600 or so in 1980,
        compared to $12000 or so in 2008 (with presumably some further
        increases since then), which I think supports the dectuple
        claim. I think the site suggests higher increases than the graph
        because I’m focusing on tuition only (excluding room and board)
        in four-year universities.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465160>
          o
            Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:09 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465224>
            ~new~

            I suspect many colleges are actually getting a fair amount
            of money cheating their students on rent. Not in the sense
            of breaking a contract, but banning student participation in
            the local rent market. This is the case at least at my
            school, where students are required to live in dorms for two
            years (after which point they are kicked out because my
            school admits too many people), despite the availability of
            housing that is both better and cheaper within a block or so
            of the campus. I suspect things are similar elsewhere, but
            do not know.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465176>
              +
                Ludwig Schubert says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 5:13 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465266>
                ~new~

                Anecdote against your anecdote: my university subsidizes
                housing by about 50% compared to prices in the
                neighborhood. (US west coast)

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465224>
                  #
                    David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim>
                    says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:55 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465455>
                    ~new~

                    True in the case of most urban colleges, not in the
                    case of those located away from cities.

                    But in cities, housing costs have also skyrocketed,
                    and colleges usually own all the closest land, which
                    is then underdeveloped compared to those
                    neighborhoods (see: Columbia U) – which then itself
                    increases rent prices nearby due to induced scarcity
                    of nearby land.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465266>
              +
                wintermute92 says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 3:21 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465603>
                ~new~

                My university did similar. Mandatory housing on campus
                first year, a lottery system to /let you leave/ the
                second year, and then no housing thereafter. Meal plans
                were even mandatory the first year, at ~$10-$15 per meal.

                The town had massively overpriced rent because they kept
                refusing zoning for new apartments (to “preserve the
                town’s character”, and no it wasn’t SF). Despite that, I
                got a 50% cost reduction when I escaped university
                housing. It was a pretty blatant cash grab, and they
                were talking about building more dorms to extract more
                revenue.

                (A friend at another school got “mandatory the first
                three years, scarce lottery to leave the fourth year”
                despite living in a high-vacancy town where the dorms
                cost ~4 times the local average rent.)

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465224>
                  #
                    Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 6:22 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465725>
                    ~new~

                    “Lottery to leave” surprises me; before they ran out
                    of space it was a lottery for upperclassmen to
                    remain in the (heavily advertised) dorms. It was the
                    case that all the dorms require meal plans, and even
                    the ones with “ranges” don’t have freezers or enough
                    of a stove to really make cooking practical.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465603>
              +
                Asiago says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 10:56 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466123>
                ~new~

                I have this exact situation at my school, are you an
                Ohio State student as well?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465224>
          o
            Cerebral Paul Z. says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:49 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465451>
            ~new~

            The numbers at the NCES site are given in current dollars,
            not constant dollars. Good catch, Prof. F.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465176>
10.
    shakeddown <https://shakeddown.wordpress.com/> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:46 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465162>
    ~new~

    Anecdote about risk-tolerance (and fear of being sued): I’ve gone to
    climbing gyms in Israel, France, Switzerland, and the US. In the
    first three, I walked in and got asked if I knew how to belay. If I
    said no, they spent 10-20 minutes showing me how and let me go about
    it. If I said yes, they just let me go (or maybe just took a minute
    to make sure I really knew what I was doing).
    When I went in the US, I had to sign two different liability forms,
    then either take an hour-long course (which cost extra and was only
    given in the afternoon) or on one occasion, pass a test (I got one
    detail wrong, which got me sent back to having to take the course),
    after I said I knew what I was doing.
    To put this in perspective, climbing wall injuries are incredibly
    rare
    <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-injuries-climbers-idUSBRE97T0TI20130830>.
    \end{rant}

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        newt0311 says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:38 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465217>
        ~new~

        Where in the US was this?

        So in my experience:

        In CA (specifically Hangar 18 in and around LA): New people at
        the gym could get a twenty minute orientation on how to belay.
        The instruction was fairly competent. Afterwards they could
        belay as they would like. If they already knew how to belay,
        they just needed to demonstrate the skills which took about five
        minutes.

        In NYC (pretty much all the gyms in NYC): people who already
        know how to belay can get a belay test which is free and takes a
        few minutes. New people have the option of taking a class on
        belaying which takes about an hour and costs $$$ but at least is
        fairly competently taught. “We” (me and my friends) suspect the
        class is there because it is a significant revenue source for
        the gyms. We don’t think it is related to any specific risks of
        being sued because belay tests are fairly lax (for top-rope
        climbing at least) and the liability waivers are fairly
        comprehensive (and because the class fees are such obvious
        motivators).

        In TX (a while ago. I don’t remember the exact gym): people who
        already knew how to belay can take a belay test. Those who don’t
        get a very /in/competently taught lessons though grigri’s are so
        difficult to mess up that it probably doesn’t matter in the gym
        itself.

        I’ve never had to sign more than one liability waiver/gym. In
        some cases they let customers do it online in advance which is
        pretty convenient. Also in my experience top-rope belaying tests
        tend to be pretty lenient. Lead tests are usually more stringent
        but that makes sense since there are a lot more ways to hurt
        yourself leading. Still I’ve taken lead tests in quite a few
        gyms by now and they generally don’t take more than 10-15
        minutes. For the most part is it just climbing a fairly easy
        (5.8-ish) route with one fall and then belaying somebody doing
        the same thing.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465162>
          o
            shakeddown <https://shakeddown.wordpress.com/> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:14 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465508>
            ~new~

            Connecticut and Minnesota. It’s good to hear my experiences
            were non-typical.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465217>
      *
        Creutzer says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:15 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465226>
        ~new~

        Where in /France/ was this? My experience with climbing gyms in
        France is exactly the ridiculousness you describe for the US.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465162>
          o
            shakeddown <https://shakeddown.wordpress.com/> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465511>
            ~new~

            Grenoble, where they were really easy-going. I don’t know
            that much about French culture – maybe mountain towns are
            more easygoing? maybe it was just that one gym?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465226>
      *
        consolidatedcatnip says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 8:00 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466062>
        ~new~

        I had interestingly similar experiences in South Korean gyms.
        Slapping the equivalent of 5 bucks on the front counter was all
        you needed to lift in peace – towel and locker provided gratis.
        Monthly and yearly plans were, of course, discounted from the
        nightly rate. $20-30 a month was average, the high-end places
        with associated saunas went for around $50. When I got back to
        America after a few years, imagine my shock at the reams of
        paperwork – liability waivers, personal information, credit
        checks, even – that were required to sign up for (mandatory)
        yearly plans at pretty much every establishment I encountered.
        Suffice to say I was less shocked to see the domestics costs
        roughly doubly those provided by their Korean counterparts (at
        no noticeable difference in quality).

        America is an expensive place to live. Anyone who has lived
        abroad can attest to that, and Americans who haven’t lived
        abroad don’t really understand how much more expensive everyday
        life is.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465162>
11.
    psmith says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:54 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465165>
    ~new~

    Declining population-level intelligence, executive function,
    conscientiousness, and so on due to pollution and dysgenics.

    (You’d have to explain away the Flynn effect, mind.).

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        multiheaded says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:32 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465253>
        ~new~

        Yep, look at Evropa by way of contrast, clearly it’s steadfastly
        Aryan enough to resist the (((degeneracy))). /s

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465165>
          o
            albertborrow says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:33 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465439>
            ~new~

            I think you’re safe with out the “/s” – Evropa puts your
            post soundly in parody territory and the (((triple
            parentheses))) push it over the edge. However, I’m not sure
            @psmith was actually talking about race, because he followed
            it up with evidence contrary to the proposed hypothesis. The
            only thing suspect to me was “dysgenics”.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465253>
          o
            psmith says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:12 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465506>
            ~new~

            Since you mention it
            <http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Fertility_statistics_in_relation_to_economy,_parity,_education_and_migration#By_educational_level>.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465253>
      *
        Ilya Shpitser says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:19 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465329>
        ~new~

        “Declining population-level intelligence”

        “You’d have to explain away the Flynn effect”

        ???

        This is, what, racism as an article of faith? Where do you work?
        What’s your IQ?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465165>
          o
            psmith says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:14 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465510>
            ~new~

            Why is everything always about race with you people?

            Anyway, it’s not like the Flynn effect is uncontroversial.
            Check out the results on backwards vs forwards digit span
            <https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B3c4TxciNeJZSzlJT2tVZUVnZjA/view>.

                What’s your IQ?

            No idea, but I stayed in a Holiday Inn last night.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465329>
              +
                Ilya Shpitser says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 1:52 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465538>
                ~new~

                Well, consider the worries of “us people” put to rest.

                —

                I would welcome some reading on causal influence of
                pollution and dysgenics, if you had any lying around.
                Since you seemed to start with that.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465510>
                  #
                    albertborrow says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:15 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465644>
                    ~new~

                    Not OP, but Google seems to tell me that pollution
                    impacts education and scores.
                    <www.google.com/search?q=pollution+effect+on+education>
                    I’m not sure whether this effect persists to
                    adulthood or if it is temporary, but it worries me
                    regardless. The only studies I could find about IQ
                    from Google Scholar were on the side-effects of
                    lead, which only really concerns places with lead
                    pollution. However, if we have conclusive evidence
                    that certain medications in childhood cause
                    long-term problems, I don’t see why pollution, being
                    more prevalent and less regulated, would lack
                    complications. The question is whether these impact
                    society or individuals.

                    Maybe China is doing studies on it? I recently heard
                    news that they were considering green energy, which
                    is not typical of them.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465538>
                  #
                    psmith says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:51 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465674>
                    ~new~

                    Dysgenics: I was thinking of the Iceland paper on
                    genetic variants associated with educational
                    attainment. Small effect size, to be sure, but it
                    was in the news recently.

                    For pollution, I was thinking Robertson on
                    atmospheric CO2: As the degree of acidosis
                    increases, somnolence and confusion follow
                    <http://www.iisc.ernet.in/currsci/jun252006/1607.pdf>.
                    But there are a million other things that you could
                    follow up on here: lead, fatty acid composition, the
                    effects of various common drugs on the fetus when
                    taken by the mother during pregnancy, the
                    correlation between living near a highway and
                    dementia, the correlation between anticholinergic
                    drug (e.g. Benadryl) use and dementia, epigenetic
                    effects of artificial lighting….

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465538>
          o
            AnonEEmous says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:23 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465605>
            ~new~

            the juxtaposition of those two sentences argues for him
            advancing a theorem but pointing out the obvious flaw, which
            if it could be fixed would make the theorem more powerful

            not endorsing the theorem as-is

            just saying.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465329>
      *
        herbert herberson says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:54 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465354>
        ~new~

        You’d also have to explain how it matters more than the clear
        and positive effect of unleaded gasoline (for example, that’s
        very likely to be a big part of the increase in minority test
        scores Scott talks about in paragraph 5)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465165>
          o
            psmith says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:29 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465524>
            ~new~

            Lead was a big deal, but the SAT at least was renormed.
            Maybe it’s chronic acidosis from increased atmospheric CO2
            levels.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465354>
12.
    Tristan says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:54 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465166>
    ~new~

    A theory: what if the underlying cause of this is technology? A
    question struck me in the shower. To whom does the money go? It
    isn’t higher wages. Some no doubt goes to our capitalist overlords.
    But I think a commenter above has the right idea. More people are
    involved in providing basically the same service. And why is that?
    Advances in technology — mainly in agriculture and manufacturing —
    have made the jobs “they” did before redundant. And so people
    “invent” jobs for themselves and others with only very marginal
    benefits in sections that are able to absorb this simply to be able
    to provide for themselves.

    So basically an uncoordinated attempt at basic income and employment
    therapy payed for by increased productivity in other fields!

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        aldi says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:57 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465169>
        ~new~

        Have you read Lafargue? He wrote about the Right to be Lazy and
        prefigured exactly your concerns about invented labor.

        Exactly what we see today with the bucket of crabs situation in
        healthcare and the wasteful competition in marketing/advertising

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465166>
      *
        Jack says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:02 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465174>
        ~new~

        +1, though I would like to add, probably all those
        administrators in universities and schools have some benefits as
        well as costs. The people in universities relying on mental
        health services, for instance, would like to have a word with
        anyone who thinks we should go straight back to the seventies.
        Other potential benefits are more elusive. Some argue that
        advertising helps people “self-actualize”. Who can compare the
        pleasures of buying a Coke before and after indoctrination?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465166>
          o
            watsonbladd says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:18 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465178>
            ~new~

            Most students have health insurance through their parents,
            and could seek out care in the community instead. I think in
            some places like Grinnell this might not be as possible, but
            there is no reason a school in a major city needs its own
            doctors.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465174>
              +
                Jack says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 1:41 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465184>
                ~new~

                I agree that there is no obvious reason to prefer that
                doctors in general come through schools (and an obvious
                reason against–that everyone and not just students
                should have doctors). Accessibility services however
                include programmes targetted to the situation of a
                university. This can include things that could have
                specialization-based cost-savings, as well as things
                that a university needs to directly engage with.
                Examples of both kinds: an embedded counsellor with
                expertise in the stresses of a given institution; a
                system of note-takers that allow people who cannot take
                their own notes to have notes; the kind of training that
                hopefully results in aegrotats or rewrites for people
                who have an anxiety attack in the middle of an exam. All
                that said, I am not sure what relevance the
                preferability of care being available more generally
                has, since my claim was only that mental health services
                in fact get used and benefit their users. Either these
                students do not have the access to care outside of their
                universities you suggest, or they are underusing their
                health insurance through ignorance in which case health
                insurance is now cheaper for everyone else.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465178>
      *
        Scott Alexander says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:44 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465187>
        ~new~

        This resonates with me emotionally, but it doesn’t make sense
        economically. Yes, unemployed people would like to have easy
        jobs doing pointless work, but why would anybody employ them?
        Shouldn’t some business get rid of all of the useless positions,
        charge half as much, and make a killing?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465166>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:05 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465198>
            ~new~

            Many of those positions are in public institutions, though,
            where it’s very difficult to fire employees and supervisors
            rarely want to decrease the size of their department since
            it means a reduction in their personal prestige.

            My wife recently took a job as an administrator at a private
            college, after having spent the last few years in the UC
            administration. The first thing she said when she came home
            on the first day was, “I cannot believe how busy people are.
            In my office at UC, many of the staff were idle for half the
            day or more, just killing time. Absolutely no one is here.”

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
          o
            Tristan says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:07 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465199>
            ~new~

            Well, my theory would be that the “useless” positions mostly
            are to be found in the public sector or in other fields
            where perverse incentives makes it easier to hide or justify
            the extra cost (e.g. governance, education, health care).
            Also, in big companies where the average employee care more
            about themselves and their closest colleagues than the
            company bottom line.

            Some testable predictions: (1) countries with lower
            technology levels and a bigger agricultural sector should
            have lower costs for education and health care (adjusted for
            possible confounders) and (2) a lot more people are employed
            in education and health care (although mainly in various
            supportive or administrative functions) now than fifty years
            ago.

            I don’t have time to check myself because I need to be seen
            working at my sort of useless position in local governance…

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
          o
            sustrik says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:20 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465250>
            ~new~

            I thought about that a lot and I believe the fallacy here is
            to think of companies as rational actors (“why would company
            hire this person?”). But, of course, they do not have
            personhood and do not do decisions, except via their
            employees. Once you look at it from perspective of
            individuals involved (shareholders, CEO, middle manager, the
            worker) the whole proposition suddenly makes much more sense.

            I’ve written about it here: http://250bpm.com/blog:44

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
          o
            Aapje says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 9:27 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465335>
            ~new~

            @Scott Alexander

            My analysis is that organizations gradually expand, simply
            because they is the constant creation of new positions and
            other positions becomes obsolete, but for the people in the
            organization it is much easier and more pleasant to hire
            someone for that new position than to remove the obsolete
            position. So you need to do forced cuts, just to stay at the
            same level. It is very painful to eliminate people, because
            you have to look people in the eye and basically tell them
            that they are useless. Shareholders tend to hire relatively
            sociopathic people to run organizations, because they are
            willing to do this.

            In politics, making cuts has a different dynamic, because it
            is fairly easy to convince the public (who tend to be fairly
            badly informed) that cuts are permanent, rather than part of
            a normal process of expansion, followed by cuts, followed by
            expansion, followed by cuts, etc. Instead, they think that
            cuts means less money going to that field permanently,
            rather than that cuts are necessary to stay at the same
            level. Surveys in my country consistently find that voters
            believe that the cost growth is much less than it actually
            is. So it is easy for various interests groups to
            aggressively lobby to limit these cuts below what is
            necessary, because the voters are not just shareholders, but
            also consumers who think that they are being short-changed
            if cuts are made.

            PS. Note that shareholders have their own blind spots, for
            example, they tend to believe that you can attract good
            CEO’s by paying more, so they participate in huge CEO wage
            inflation. So private businesses have their own cost disease.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
              +
                TheAncientGeekAKA1Z
                <https://pierrephilosophique.wordpress.com/> says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:04 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465362>
                ~new~

                .

                    Shareholders tend to hire relatively sociopathic
                    people to run organizations, because they are
                    willing to do this

                .

                Or external consultants who go through a ritual of
                considering every possible source of corporate malaise
                before invariably recommending redundancies.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465335>
                  #
                    Aapje says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 10:14 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465373>
                    ~new~

                    I see that as the same thing, as those are hired by
                    the CEO’s. Nothing is stopping the public sector
                    from hiring George Clooney
                    <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1193138/>.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465362>
              +
                baconbacon says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 2:50 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465577>
                ~new~

                    My analysis is that organizations gradually expand,
                    simply because they is the constant creation of new
                    positions and other positions becomes obsolete, but
                    for the people in the organization it is much easier
                    and more pleasant to hire someone for that new
                    position than to remove the obsolete position. So
                    you need to do forced cuts, just to stay at the same
                    level. It is very painful to eliminate people,
                    because you have to look people in the eye and
                    basically tell them that they are useless.
                    Shareholders tend to hire relatively sociopathic
                    people to run organizations, because they are
                    willing to do this.

                If this were true newly formed businesses would have
                huge edges over established businesses.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465335>
                  #
                    CatCube says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:15 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465645>
                    ~new~

                    In some ways they do; Netflix destroyed Blockbuster,
                    despite Blockbuster having a guaranteed income
                    stream, an existing brand, and extensive contacts
                    within the organizations selling movies. What they
                    also had was an extensive organization optimized to
                    renting physical disks and a lot of people who had a
                    lot of experience in running storefronts. The people
                    whose ricebowls would have been broken by a pivot to
                    streaming were able to fend it off, until
                    everybody’s ricebowl got broken when the company
                    went under.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:20 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465647>
                    ~new~

                    They often do. My favorite example is dell
                    computers. Prior to dell, there was no direct way to
                    buy computers from manufactures, you had to order
                    them all through retailers because the retailers
                    threatened to cut off any manufacturer who started
                    doing direct sales, and that was too big a hit for
                    any of them to take. Dell got started by only doing
                    direct sales, and carved out a major niche for
                    itself. Established institutions have resources and
                    reputation, and those are big advantages, but they
                    lack agility and generally have trouble adjusting to
                    genuinely new modes of operation.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 7:30 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465773>
                    ~new~

                    @baconbacon: Don’t be so quick to dismiss @Aapje’s
                    point; small organizations do have a huge edge in
                    operational efficiency, but they also have huge
                    entrenchment disadvantages in many markets, and some
                    businesses benefit from economies of scale that are
                    difficult to service without growing an organization
                    to the size where it becomes sclerotic.

                    The inability of that single principle to completely
                    determine the winner in a market should not be used
                    to dismiss it as an explanation for why costs could
                    increase over time in sclerotized markets
                    independent of service quality.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 8:48 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466081>
                    ~new~

                        If this were true newly formed businesses would
                        have huge edges over established businesses.

                    Yes, that is exactly why you see the constant waves
                    of layoff after layoff at ongoing and profitable
                    large companies. Between these layoffs, these firms
                    are expanding, and the only way for them to compete
                    with new startups is to constantly go through
                    layoffs. The firms that don’t do this are ones who
                    can’t compete and disappear after a while.

                    Well, this would exclude quickly growing firms, that
                    may manage to direct this expansion to where the
                    company needs more people. Although this is a very
                    difficult task, so many growing firms end up with
                    too many of some people and not enough of others —
                    and these firms disappear too.

                    And this is why government services are usually so
                    much less efficient than private industry. They
                    gradually expand, don’t have the political ability
                    to constantly lay off, and so have more people than
                    they need. I think this explains much of Scott’s
                    “cost disease,” since most of the increasing costs
                    are with governments or those regulated so much that
                    they act in the same manner as governments.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 11:02 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466217>
                    ~new~

                        Don’t be so quick to dismiss @Aapje’s point;
                        small organizations do have a huge edge in
                        operational efficiency, but they also have huge
                        entrenchment disadvantages in many markets, and
                        some businesses benefit from economies of scale
                        that are difficult to service without growing an
                        organization to the size where it becomes sclerotic.

                    The things you mention mostly REDUCE costs,
                    economies of scale, branding, operational
                    efficiency. For excess useless employees to drive up
                    costs they have to on net be a larger cost than the
                    benefits of size, which automatically makes smaller
                    companies that could avoid them more competitive in
                    an open market. Fantasies about organizational bloat
                    happening i n an open market always fail to include
                    such considerations.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    Aapje says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 6:13 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466554>
                    ~new~

                    @baconbacon

                    That makes no sense since small companies by
                    definition do not benefit from the advantages that
                    big companies have. As such, they need to be
                    considerably more efficient than big companies to be
                    competitive (or find a niche that the big company
                    fails to serve).

                    You also forgot ‘corporate welfare’ as a factor,
                    which benefits big business much more.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 9:56 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466621>
                    ~new~

                        That makes no sense since small companies by
                        definition do not benefit from the advantages
                        that big companies have.

                    You are trying to artificially separate out two
                    related things. “Big companies have advantages of
                    size, but big companies have lots of low value
                    employees”. Small companies don’t become big and
                    then hire more employees, hiring more is part of the
                    process of growing.

                    You can’t have it both ways*, either the small
                    company has to hire lots of good people to become a
                    big company and so gain returns from the economies
                    of scale or small companies are hiring lots of bad
                    (inefficient, whatever) people along the way and
                    still becoming large companies.

                    *You can postulate that many of the people who were
                    hired when the company was size X were good for a
                    company of that size, but they are bad for a company
                    of size 3X.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:24 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466816>
                    ~new~

                    @baconbacon

                    >The things you mention mostly REDUCE costs,
                    economies of scale, branding, operational
                    efficiency. For excess useless employees to drive up
                    costs they have to on net be a larger cost than the
                    benefits of size, which automatically makes smaller
                    companies that could avoid them more competitive in
                    an open market. Fantasies about organizational bloat
                    happening i n an open market always fail to include
                    such considerations.

                    Economies of scale are not a natural law of the
                    universe. Diseconomies of scale are far more common.
                    As organizations grow, overhead grows geometrically,
                    not linearly. A small company can get by hiring
                    people on an ad-hoc basis, but soon you need an HR
                    person, then a whole HR division. And while those HR
                    people do do a lot of the work that everyone else
                    used to do, they also generate work. Once you have
                    an HR person/division, they start writing rules that
                    people in the other departments have to learn and
                    comply with. You start needed meetings between HR
                    and other departments to argue over those rules, and
                    so on. There are circumstances where there are
                    compensating economies of scale to make up for the
                    inherent dis-economies, like large lot
                    manufacturing, but they’re the exception not the
                    rule. The advantage large companies have is not that
                    they are more efficient, they rarely are, but that
                    they have more resources to throw at the problem.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:56 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466840>
                    ~new~

                        Economies of scale are not a natural law of the
                        universe. Diseconomies of scale are far more common

                    Hey, I was mocking Krugman’s Nobel prize before it
                    was cool.

                    As far as it pertains to this discussion, you don’t
                    get cost bloat this way. If you have advantages from
                    size in one place, and disadvantages in others they
                    will (in a competitive environment) have to balance
                    out or on net be cost reducing. If they aren’t then
                    a different sized company will have the opportunity
                    to steal market share away.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465577>
          o
            Spookykou says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:06 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465639>
            ~new~

            When I was hired at my current job I was the only person in
            my position and was able to handle the work load easily,
            eventually I left. I was offered the job about a year later
            and decided to come back only to find that I was one of
            three people doing what I had been doing alone before. Oh
            and they restructured and the three of us have about half as
            much work as I had when I first started. I work for fortune
            500 company that employees about half a million people,
            although I imagine the 2/3rd redundancy is probably not true
            in all departments.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
          o
            Adam says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:39 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465739>
            ~new~

            The marketing arms race mentioned above is tempting to
            believe. It’s pretty much zero sum spending since you can’t
            really increase aggregate purchasing power of your consumers
            with better marketing. I have no idea if spending on this or
            employment in the sector has actually increased, though.
            It’s not pointless jobs, but the only reason the company
            gains from it is because everyone else is doing it, too.
            It’s not making their product any better or their production
            processes any more efficient.

            Of course, public schools don’t market. Drug advertisements
            have always struck me as weird and totally pointless, though.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
          o
            Brackto says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466005>
            ~new~

            When your society is organized around the concept that
            everyone needs to either get a job or starve to death, it
            isn’t surprising that it finds mechanisms to preserve or
            create jobs even if they are strictly unnecessary. In some
            respects, our system is designed to treat waste as a feature
            and not a bug.

            Consider that you aren’t necessarily looking at one company
            hiring three people to do the job of one; you could be
            looking at three *companies* simultaneously doing the job of
            one. This is a danger any time “employees required” doesn’t
            scale linearly with “customers served”, which I would expect
            to happen in many cases across different fields.

            We could surely have drastically reduced health care costs
            by adopting some kind of socialized system along the
            European model, but that is politically impossible because
            all that wasted money is providing hundreds of thousands of
            (redundant) jobs in the private health care market. We
            ignore a social technology that would improve efficiency
            because its adoption would throw unacceptably many people
            out of work; it’s like Luddism but with far more political
            clout.

            Also, don’t assume that all redundant jobs are easily
            identifiable as “easy jobs doing pointless work”. Most
            college lecturers probably don’t think of their jobs that
            way. but employing thousands of professors to deliver
            individual, yet nearly identical calculus lectures all
            around the country year after year after year has been an
            exercise in mind-boggling inefficiency ever since the
            invention of film. Of course, the system preserves their
            jobs nonetheless.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
              +
                MathEpic says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 4:50 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466009>
                ~new~

                    employing thousands of professors to deliver
                    individual, yet nearly identical calculus lectures
                    all around the country year after year after year
                    has been an exercise in mind-boggling inefficiency
                    ever since the invention of film. Of course, the
                    system preserves their jobs nonetheless.

                Using recorded lectures has been tried, and it is not
                job protection that keeps us coming back to the lecture
                model. I am not an expert on education, but from my own
                experience here are some disadvantages that come from
                recorded lectures:

                1. It is hard to maintain consistency between the
                recorded lecturer and the other parts of the course if
                the lectures are static.
                2. Recorded lectures lack the adaptability needed to
                answer questions the students may have.
                3. This may be a bug in the way humans learn but it is
                hard to pay attention to a recorded person talking to
                someone other then you about something you don’t care
                about. In short, recorded lectures are boring, and
                people learn less from boring lectures.

                I realize that it would be cheaper to use recordings
                instead of professors (or, more realistically, graduate
                students) to teach calculus classes. Nevertheless, there
                is also a cost of eliminating the human element that
                cannot simply be ignored if you want to do a complete
                analysis.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466005>
                  #
                    Brackto says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:21 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466094>
                    ~new~

                    I do listen to a lot of video lectures, and find
                    them very educational. One thing I have noticed is
                    that production quality matters *immensely*.
                    Presently, most of the materials available are from
                    projects like MIT open courseware where the lectures
                    are intended for live students and recorded as kind
                    of an afterthought; that doesn’t work very well. You
                    really have to make producing a high-quality
                    video-lecture the first priority in order to have a
                    product that’s easy to pay attention to and learn
                    from. They work very well if done properly. I think
                    the only reason more materials like this don’t exist
                    is that people just haven’t made it a priority.

                    I certainly don’t propose that the human element can
                    be completely eliminated, but I do think that
                    lectures could be treated as a resource much like
                    books, with human experts present for “office hours”.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466009>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:14 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466256>
                    ~new~

                    I have long been puzzled by why lecturers were not
                    replaced by books shortly after the invention of
                    printing made books cheap. Video is just the latest
                    incarnation of that puzzle.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466009>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:10 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466319>
                    ~new~

                    To put forth a theory: humans are evolutionarily
                    adapted to focus close attention to other humans
                    because they are potential predators. For many
                    people, it is easier to absorb information when that
                    instinct is helping them to focus.

                    (I’m most definitely not one of them, and my guess
                    is that many others here on SSC are not either. Give
                    me a book any day.)

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466009>
              +
                CatCube says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 5:00 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466013>
                ~new~

                Somebody linked above a discussion regarding why
                lectures still exist when you can just record it and
                throw it on YouTube. That was in OT 49.5, so I’m going
                to push back on it here: I /despise/ taking online
                classes. I learn much more easily and effectively when I
                can interact face-to-face with the instructor, even if
                it’s in a large lecture hall; I’m that guy who has no
                problems asking a question if I don’t understand
                something. If I’m stuck taking a class, I’m going to
                learn whatever I can from it, Goddammit. I learn a lot
                more in less time from a lecture than I do from reading
                a book.

                It’s a lot harder even in a live webcast to ask for or
                get clarification than a live lecture. It’s obviously
                impossible in a recorded class. And, this shouldn’t be
                the case but it is, when I have scheduled lectures it
                keeps me on track in a way “read this book” or “just
                pull up this YouTube video” doesn’t.

                It’d be great if I could be one of the many people here
                who learn best from sitting down with a book, but I’m
                not. I don’t think I’m uncommon.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466005>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:01 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466084>
                    ~new~

                        It’d be great if I could be one of the many
                        people here who learn best from sitting down
                        with a book, but I’m not. I don’t think I’m
                        uncommon.

                    I think most college classes are set up just that
                    way, or at least at the higher levels of college —
                    one reads the book to learn the subject, and then
                    you go to the lecture for clarification. It is
                    exactly those people who do learn best from the book
                    that would find a recorded or on-line course
                    useless. The point of going to class is to ask
                    questions.

                    But it is enormously more expensive to learn stuff
                    from listening to lecturers than it is to get the
                    information from books. But maybe not so much if
                    recorded or on-line. As I remember my college years,
                    there were too many that depended on the teacher to
                    learn the material rather than the books they had to
                    read. But for the best learning, you need the
                    experts to help you with questions. If you only have
                    books and recorded or on-line classes, then you
                    don’t need the college at all.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466013>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:20 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466258>
                    ~new~

                        It’s a lot harder even in a live webcast to ask
                        for or get clarification than a live lecture.

                    I can understand the advantage of interaction. But
                    if a lecture is given to a class of several hundred,
                    as university lectures quite often are, there isn’t
                    much interaction with the individual student. You
                    get to ask a question and have a response once every
                    several lectures. You also get to hear the responses
                    to questions by other students–but you would get
                    that in a recording of the lecture as well.

                    On the other hand, a book has large advantages over
                    a lecture. You can read parts you have trouble
                    following slowly and several times, move quickly
                    over what is obvious. The author can do a much more
                    careful job of presenting and explaining his ideas
                    than in a lecture. You get to read the best book on
                    the subject ever written–if you are lucky you get to
                    listen to the best lecturer in the field currently
                    teaching in your school, possibly one of the
                    thousand best currently teaching.

                    So why isn’t the optimal policy to entirely replace
                    the lecture with reading, and provide the
                    interaction in a different format with a much higher
                    ratio of teachers to students, like the Oxbridge
                    system with the lecture part replaced by books?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466013>
              +
                Incurian says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 10:03 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466107>
                ~new~

                    …but that is politically impossible because all that
                    wasted money is providing hundreds of thousands of
                    (redundant) jobs in the private health care market

                I have never heard of anyone rejecting socialized
                healthcare on the grounds that it preserves jobs.
                Typically the people against socializing things are also
                the people in favor of creative destruction. Have I
                misinterpreted you?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466005>
                  #
                    Brackto says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 10:16 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466112>
                    ~new~

                    I suspect you *have* heard that, you maybe just
                    didn’t realize what you were really hearing. When
                    lobbyists of the private insurance market turned out
                    in force to convince Obama that a single-payer
                    option would be a disaster for American businesses,
                    that is what was happening.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466107>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 11:24 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466125>
                    ~new~

                    It’s not so much an argument people make as that the
                    people who hold those jobs have unions/professional
                    associations that will lobby like hell against any
                    proposal that would result in their elimination.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466107>
          o
            MartMart says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 11:42 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466226>
            ~new~

            That economic argument relies on a functioning competitive
            market.
            If there is elite college A, that needs to charge high
            prices since part of what it offers is a status symbol, it
            then has the resources to pay people for useless work
            (especially if it can claim that this enhances its status
            somehow) or provide luxurious facilities, etc. A new entrant
            into the market couldn’t undercut it with cheaper tuition
            because it wont have the status, and besides for profit
            colleges are icky or something.

            The market for subway tunnels isn’t exactly competitive
            either. Government selects a contractor based on a not
            entirely transparent or truthful process, and then the
            contractor builds 1 tunnel. For a truly competitive
            situation, you’d need many companies building many tunnels,
            then charging fees to cover their costs.
            Alas the nonfungibility inherent in infrastructure makes it
            really difficult to adopt into a private market model.
            Medical costs are such a mess that no real competition on
            price is possible, imo.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465187>
      *
        consolidatedcatnip says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 8:11 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466067>
        ~new~

        This is a very interesting thought. I often marvel at how much
        modern economic activity seems so…unnecessary. It’s an old trope
        to complain about the American consumer economy being based on
        fools shilling useless trinkets to each other, but there is some
        truth in it. 3 generations ago your Cat Psychologist would have
        been a farmhand and your cat a mouse hunting tool. Now there are
        so many fewer farmhands, and machinists, and foundry workers,
        etc etc etc. At a certain point, we might actually have more
        people than we need workers to provide our economy with the
        basics for healthy, happy, stable lives. What to do with the
        “surplus” population of workers? Cat Psychology! You get the point.

        Ask yourself, if I woke up tomorrow and my entire profession
        ceased to exist, could civilization continue? I suspect that for
        many, many people the answer is yes. And how many consumer
        dollars are spent each quarter on those types of goods/services
        (that is, the more or less useless ones)?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465166>
13.
    aldi says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:54 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465167>
    ~new~

    Have you read Piketty?

    How far back can you trace this trend?

    Keynes writing in ’35 was also soon to be vindicated by the economic
    upheaval of WW2, which would shake down every country involved,
    force them to invest in infrastructure and use up savings, and then
    depopulate them a little, setting them all up for trente glorieuses
    to greater or lesser extents as their economies grew back into the
    space vacated.

    Lots of centrist governments with a mandate to repair their
    countries and reward their electorates were in power, lots of effort
    was being made to reward electorates. So for a while
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post–World_War_II_economic_expansion
    we all saw what looked like consistent, spectacular growth that all
    could share in. And then it abruptly stopped when finance decided it
    wasn’t going to be pushed around and captured legislatures in most
    western countries by the late ’70s.

    “Cost disease” could also belie the increasing consideration of
    externalities, that I personally hope will one day turn into truly
    environmental full-cost accounting. You can’t graze your herds on a
    commons any more, you have to pay rent. You can’t chuck the waste in
    the harbor any more, you need to pay for treatment, sorting, and
    taxes on the municipality maintaining the sewage infrastructure. And
    so on. I hope that as more of the resources we collectively need are
    considered in transactions, the market will either start to behave
    itself or fall away entirely.

    This is a fun and exciting collection of trends, but what little
    there is to link them just shows how far we have to go and how “cost
    disease” is a canard.

    https://www.gmu.edu/centers/publicchoice/faculty%20pages/Tyler/why-i-do-not-believe.PDF

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        teageegeepea says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:15 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465690>
        ~new~

        What happened in the 70s is an interesting topic. Prior to the
        Great Recession, Scott Sumner was focused on how different
        countries reacted in different ways. Denmark stood out as one
        that had shifted most toward neoliberalism (though New Zealand
        arguably rivalled it), hence naming his paper The Great Danes
        <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1629940>.
        The least neoliberal developed country
        <http://econlog.econlib.org/archives/2016/06/the_left_greece.html>,
        Greece serves as a sort of Goofus to Denmark’s Gallant, although
        much of southern europe is similar. Of course, Sumner is a
        neoliberal and you only have his word that he identified Greece
        as the least neoliberal back when it was booming rather than
        after it crashed. Someone else might come up with a different
        measure of statism/liberalism (and indeed Sumner modifies the
        Heritage measure by removing two components).

        This also reminded me of another thing. Many economists, like
        Sumner, point out that the Greek government spends a large
        portion of its GDP even after austerity, whereas poorer eastern
        european countries spend less and are understandably reluctant
        to subsidize Greece. These economists generally think Greece
        should just change its system to fit within its new
        eastern-european sized budget, but just as there’s no obvious
        way to replace our currently expensive sectors with those of the
        past, I don’t think even a parliament full of neoliberals would
        know how to simply do that.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465167>
          o
            aldi says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 6:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466355>
            ~new~

            And I’m not willing to take his word. The only thing I’m
            interested in hearing from Sumner is an honest account of
            the political gymnastics he underwent to exclude market
            reformers, globalists, investors and the entire fossil fuel
            industry from “rent-seeking special interest groups”.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465690>
14.
    deciusbrutus says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:08 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465175>
    ~new~

    Follow the money. “Health care” costs more; “education” costs more.
    But those things each have line items, and the line items have line
    items, and so on fractally. At each point there are either new line
    items totaling more than the prior cost, or a large increase in item
    cost that has an explanation deeper in the numbers.

    And I don’t believe that it actually costs as much as is written off
    to treat someone using the ER to come off of a bad trip.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
15.
    dspeyer says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:12 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465177>
    ~new~

    I’m skeptical of the claim that corporate profits aren’t that high.

    Corporate profits are hard to measure. Anti-inductively hard. If
    they can be measured, they can be taxed. Are we sure there aren’t
    large expenses paying mysterious Cayman Islands LLCs?

    The capitalist class is doing really well. You’ve talked about the
    Great Widening of the Gap Between the Rich and the Poor, which seems
    to have started in the mid 70s, around the same time these prices
    all mysteriously turned upward. Maybe the one is funding the other.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        SEE says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:38 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465256>
        ~new~

            Corporate profits are hard to measure. Anti-inductively
            hard. If they can be measured, they can be taxed.

        If profits are successfully hidden from the government, they
        have to be successfully hidden from the balance sheet, showing
        up neither in dividends paid nor in assets. Which, especially in
        a US company would produce a stockholder revolt, hostile
        takeover, and purge of management. The very investor demand for
        quarterly profits that is regularly bemoaned as causing US
        corporations to be short-term thinkers prevents corporations
        from hiding their profits.

        (The obvious exception would be the minority of companies that
        do persistently run small profits without rebellion. But Amazons
        are pretty rare.)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465177>
          o
            consolidatedcatnip says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 8:27 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466074>
            ~new~

            It is quite easy. Client X is an international retailer. Its
            goods are manufactured in Asia and sold in the Middle East
            through its Swiss affiliate. The American company buys the
            goods from the Asian supplier. It then sells the same goods
            at cost to its Swiss affiliate and ships them directly to
            the Distribution Center in Dubai. The Swiss party then sells
            the goods at a huge markup to the Middle Eastern subsidiary,
            who sells the goods at-cost to end consumers through the
            physical stores.

            The Swiss subsidiary made all the money. The American
            company and Emirate subsidiary both operated at a huge loss.
            In the end the ecosystem of the corporation made a profit,
            but it will pay no taxes on that profit until the funds are
            repatriated, which they won’t be, as the money is used to
            fund expansion into the European market.

            The publicly traded holding company that controls all three
            companies can now show a profit on its balance sheet without
            having any tax liability.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465256>
              +
                Mark V Anderson says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 9:06 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466085>
                ~new~

                Switzerland has taxes too.

                Edit. Also, I want to comment on “It is quite easy.” I
                am a tax accountant. There is a whole branch of
                corporate taxation that deals with transfer pricing. The
                IRS would be very unlikely to accept the scheme you
                outlined above, nor would the UAE tax authority. There
                are very complicated ways to achieve this by extremely
                smart people — hence the Apple profits of billions in an
                Irish sub that does essentially nothing. But “easy”
                isn’t the word to use.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466074>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:28 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466099>
                    ~new~

                    …and the various tax authorities are always changing
                    the code to account for anything that turns out to
                    be too profitable. Hence the Double Irish
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double_Irish_arrangement>
                    going the way of the dodo.

                    No matter how smart you are, tax avoidance is always
                    bargaining with Lord Vader
                    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jsW9MlYu31g>.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466085>
                  #
                    consolidatedcatnip says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 10:32 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466117>
                    ~new~

                    Fair enough, “easy” is flippant, and I am certainly
                    no expert. I work on the logistics side of these
                    transactions, and I can tell you they are structured
                    exactly as I have described. To what end aside from
                    tax efficiency I cannot gather.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466085>
      *
        sohois says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:40 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465271>
        ~new~

        Aside from the issue mentioned already by SEE, I’ve seen some
        evidence that corporations can be equally vulnerable to cost
        disease as public institutions.

        For example, since the 1980s CEO pay has quintupled despite the
        lack of any growth in profits or otherwise to justify this. Now
        this is probably going to result in far smaller effects on
        overall cost, but it still stands as a demonstration of how
        market failure can occur and result in large cost increases in
        these firms.

        I would venture that many firms have seen huge increases in both
        revenues and costs so that when you adjust profit for inflation
        it hasn’t really changed at all, on average.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465177>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:04 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465275>
            ~new~

                For example, since the 1980s CEO pay has quintupled
                despite the lack of any growth in profits or otherwise
                to justify this.

            Bear in mind that a lot of this is competitive pressure. The
            employment market has changed a lot since the 1950s, and
            there’s no longer the expectation that the CEO of a major
            company is either a founder or “climbed the ladder” in the
            lifetime-employment model. Many CEOs (especially at large
            public companies, where most of the CEO pay inflation has
            come from) are recruited from outside, with top candidates
            commanding a bidding war for their services. In other words,
            the market dynamics for CEOs have changed from a buyer’s
            market to a seller’s market.

            Cronyism between directors and CEOs is definitely a factor
            here as well — there are certainly plenty of examples of
            CEOs who absconded with gratuitous pay packages while their
            company burned to the ground around them — but don’t neglect
            the basic market fundamentals when looking at this issue.
            People were greedy and self-dealing fifty years ago as well;
            that hasn’t changed, so it behooves us to look at other
            factors first.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465271>
              +
                Iain says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 8:11 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465312>
                ~new~

                How much evidence is there that top outside CEOs
                actually do a better job than old-school
                “climbed-the-ladder” CEOs?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465275>
              +
                Aapje says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 9:47 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465348>
                ~new~

                @Cypren

                I believe that the main reason is that shareholders:
                1. are incompetent at judging CEO quality (for which
                there are no good measures, so they can’t be blamed for
                this)
                2. believe that the quality of the CEO is very important
                3. believe that better performing CEO are attracted by
                above average salaries (AFAIK research shows that this
                is false)

                The result is a permanent bidding war where shareholders
                try to always give above average compensation, since
                they cannot judge the value of the CEOs and thus use
                their price as a proxy. CEOs are Veblen goods.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465275>
                  #
                    Edward Scizorhands says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:33 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465438>
                    ~new~

                    And since CEO pay is irrelevant to the bottom line,
                    there is no price pressure. A company pulling in a
                    billion a year in revenue won’t care about saving a
                    million a year on CEO pay.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
                  #
                    Cliff says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:37 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465443>
                    ~new~

                    Lots of studies on CEO pay. Most don’t seem to find
                    that they are greatly overpaid.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:51 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465495>
                    ~new~

                    @Cliff: what do you mean?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:11 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465595>
                    ~new~

                    @Aapje: Completely agreed on all points.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
                  #
                    AnonEEmous says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:30 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465611>
                    ~new~

                    from what I’ve heard most profits are due to
                    industry gains rather than specific company actions

                    which would imply that the CEOs can’t be doing much,
                    right?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
                  #
                    Aapje says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 6:41 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465742>
                    ~new~

                    @AnonEEmous

                    CEOs seem to generally be governed by the norms of
                    the CEO subculture, which makes them act very much
                    alike. IMHO, those norms mostly suck. An interesting
                    observation is that in my country, for some years,
                    the CEOs that got the prize for best manager, tended
                    to end up in in court and were reviled as destroyers
                    of their company and/or societal wealth, some years
                    later. So at least at the time, there seems to have
                    been a very destructive ideal of what a CEO should do.

                    I believe that there are actually extremely capable
                    managers, but I consider it very likely that most of
                    these never get the job as it is so hard to
                    distinguish the unconventionally good from the
                    unconventionally bad. Choosing predictably mediocre
                    is quite rational behavior for shareholders.

                    I would argue that this is why founders tend to be
                    such good managers. They simply used their
                    unconventionally good skills to never have to depend
                    on people taking the risk to parachute them into a
                    big organization. They simply build it up
                    themselves. When they go, you tend to see a way
                    different managerial style by the successor.

                    Take Steve Jobs, for example. Apple did great when
                    he was in charge. When he left, Apple was run by
                    conventional managers who did the normal managerial
                    stuff, but had no vision. Cut some jobs, lower the
                    production costs, do some R&D in the exact stuff you
                    were doing and let them make gradual improvements.
                    This kept the company going, but it stagnated. Then
                    Jobs came back and boom: big growth, leadership in
                    new markets. He clearly had something extra. If Jobs
                    goes and things start going bad and he comes back
                    and things pick up, then the rational conclusion is
                    that he was a crucial factor.

                    But again, it is far from easy to find these people.
                    It’s even harder to trust them to do their thing.
                    One of the best ideas to do so is skunkworks
                    projects, that are initiated from big companies, but
                    act like startups. They don’t have the rules,
                    inertia and such to make it hard to innovate, but if
                    they come up with something good, you can push it
                    into the parent company and take advantage of their
                    production capabilities, their marketing machine,
                    their brand, etc, etc.

                    Of course, Steve Jobs developed the Macintosh as a
                    skunkworks project, because he was unafraid to
                    cannibalize the existing to stay on top. As they
                    say: be your own competition.

                    That is an easy thing to say, but it goes against
                    the natural impulses of most people.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
                  #
                    MartMart says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 11:56 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466228>
                    ~new~

                    This leads to wonder if CEOs are particularly
                    competent at judging CEO quality.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465348>
          o
            Glen Raphael says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 12:45 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465834>
            ~new~

            @sohois

                since the 1980s CEO pay has quintupled despite the lack
                of any growth in profits *or otherwise* to justify this.

            Do you have a source on that, and are you /sure/ about the
            “/or otherwise/” part?

            Payscale.com says the median pay for the job “CEO” is 170k
            <http://www.payscale.com/research/US/Job=Chief_Executive_Officer_(CEO)/Salary>.
            That’s less than surgeons make and I’m pretty sure it hasn’t
            quintupled after inflation.

            I’m guessing you get the silly statistics by interpreting
            “CEO” to refer /only/ to CEOs of BIG companies. So what is
            it you’re talking about, the top 100? top 300? Whatever stat
            you’re looking at, those salaries have gone up but so has
            the /size of the companies/ – those high-paid CEOs are
            ultimately responsible for a vast increase in staff and
            shareholder value compared to the 1980s.

            (And if you’re only talking about the salaries of /a few
            hundred exceptional people/, it seems about as unlikely to
            explain broader economic trends as would looking at the
            salaries of sports stars and talk show hosts.)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465271>
          o
            S_J says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 10:06 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465909>
            ~new~

            /For example, since the 1980s CEO pay has quintupled despite
            the lack of any growth in profits or otherwise to justify
            this. /

            I’ve been told that the tax rules on corporations and
            CEO-pay-plus-company-provided-benefits changed greatly in
            the 1980s.

            Thus resulting in much less of “company pays for CEO’s nice
            car and membership to expensive golf club”, and much more of
            “company pays CEO directly, and CEO pays for nice car and
            membership to expensive golf club”.

            Is this true?

            If so, I think it greatly affects the analysis of CEO pay
            increase.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465271>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 4:54 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466010>
                ~new~

                Yes, the item you’re looking for is Public Law 99-514
                section 142
                <http://www.ucop.edu/research-policy-analysis-coordination/_files/Public%20Law%2099-514.pdf>,
                part of the 1986 tax reform. It eliminated a number of
                tricks companies were using to game the tax system by
                claiming outsized prices for dining and entertainment
                expenses, sharply limited the types of expenses that
                could be claimed, and made general entertainment
                expenses only 80% deductible rather than 100%.

                This largely ended the era of the company-provided car
                and country club membership for all but the most elite
                individuals at the wealthiest firms.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465909>
              +
                Jack says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 6:20 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466033>
                ~new~

                Greatly affects? How much of CEO pay was in cars and
                country clubs?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465909>
                  #
                    Nornagest says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 6:39 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466037>
                    ~new~

                    I have a feeling that these perks would have been
                    more significant at the middle management level than
                    C-level. It’s pretty hard to spend a significant
                    proportion of C*O pay on a single car short of a
                    Ferrari or Lambo (though a friend of mine has
                    stories…), but an entry-level luxury car (think
                    Buick in the ’80s, Lexus today) might otherwise have
                    represented 20% or so of a middle manager’s
                    take-home pay, adding up payments and maintenance.
                    Add a couple client lunches a week at a fancy
                    restaurant and you’re getting into some serious
                    lifestyle improvements.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466033>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 8:22 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466071>
                    ~new~

                    @Nornagest: Definitely the case. And yes, it makes
                    for a noticeably different experience.

                    My last employer was one of the largest media
                    companies in the world. As middle management in one
                    of their engineering groups, I had a blank check for
                    first-class business travel, meals and entertainment
                    expenses, and so forth. When I had to spend a few
                    months in Shanghai and Shenzhen, I was living out of
                    5 star international hotels the whole time and
                    nobody batted an eye about the expense.

                    All of these things are /obscenely/ wasteful, but
                    man did it make it comfortable to travel. (Which was
                    no doubt the point.) My current employer is just
                    under 200 people, and travel here is considered a
                    /burden/ rather than a /privilege/: people fly
                    coach, stay in economy hotels, have very limited per
                    diems; it’s all focused on economy. But as a result,
                    there’s a lot of resistance if the company wants to
                    send you somewhere rather than immediate acquiescence.

                    I think once an organization gets big enough, paying
                    for these kinds of luxuries becomes a way to reduce
                    friction. Is the cost worth it? Probably not; it’s
                    probably still mostly a case of people maximizing
                    rents within their hierarchy.

                    But I do miss it. 🙂

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466033>
16.
    Cypren says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:20 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465179>
    ~new~

    When I look at all of the categories you’ve listed out — education,
    health care, infrastructure, housing — the notable common factor
    that leaps out at me is that all of them have massive distorting
    factors that prevent markets from working.

    In primary and secondary education, health care and infrastructure,
    there’s a fundamental price insensitivity because the person
    consuming the service is not directly paying for it. This is
    extremely obvious in the case of primary education and
    infrastructure, paid for by diffuse taxpayers but consumed by
    individuals, but it’s also of course the case in most modern
    healthcare, which is paid for through comprehensive health insurance
    plans which decouple the costs of individual treatments from the fee
    being charged to the consumer. (For many people, this fee is being
    taken out of their paycheck in a completely invisible fashion, since
    it affected their salary negotiations in a way they were never aware
    of in the first place.)

    In education and infrastructure, public employee unions provide a
    powerful impediment to effective government negotiation with the
    service providers, and as @cassander points out, wage data for
    public employees is only part of the picture; their benefits
    packages are luxurious compared to private sector employees
    <https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Thom_Reilly/publication/258697973_Comparing_Public-Versus-Private_Sector_Pay_and_Benefits_Examining_Lifetime_Compensation/links/00b7d5294f4f337909000000/Comparing-Public-Versus-Private-Sector-Pay-and-Benefits-Examining-Lifetime-Compensation.pdf?origin=publication_detail>,
    they work fewer hours, retire much earlier, and in many states, they
    can game the compensation system
    <http://articles.latimes.com/2014/mar/03/local/la-me-county-pensions-20120303>
    to drastically boost their pension relative to their career earnings
    (and the amount of money that was contributed to back that pension,
    hence one of the reasons for the current solvency crisis in public
    pension funds). In addition, their pensions are usually guaranteed
    by law, in contrast to private sector retirement plans which are
    dependent upon market performance and sufficient investment.

    In infrastructure in particular, I would be very interested to see a
    productivity study of the typical US public infrastructure worker
    against the typical worker in, say, Korea. I’ve never worked
    construction, but anecdotally, friends who have had the experience
    have had very little good to say about the work ethic of many of the
    people involved in public works projects, in large part because of
    extremely generous union protections and benefits and a lack of
    pressure to perform (because the contracting companies are rarely on
    fixed-cost bids, and benefit heavily from “unforeseen” delays that
    allow them to bill for more labor). In short, there appears to be
    very little demand from the elected officials to get quality service
    for the taxpayer money, and in many cities (again, anecdotally)
    there seems to be a significant link between public works
    construction, organized crime and political kickbacks that are
    probably contributing to it.

    In addition, we have significantly higher environmental assessment
    costs in the US, and in many states, private actors can sue to block
    public works projects, creating a nearly endless stream of delays,
    studies, re-studies, committee reports, hearings and so forth that
    add significant cost and time to any project. Some organizations
    even use this as a form of “greenmail
    <http://la.curbed.com/2013/1/3/10295162/leaked-settlement-shows-how-nimbys-greenmail-developers-1>”
    to extort bribes from developers to go away.

    Moving on, higher education is price-insensitive because it is a
    status good more than anything else in the modern day. Many
    higher-end professional positions (Big Law, management consulting,
    executive leadership roles at large companies, etc) are completely
    closed to anyone without a sufficiently high-status degree from the
    Ivies or a tiny handful of other top-tier schools. Regular
    white-collar positions are almost all closed to anyone without a
    bachelor’s degree from /some/ accredited school somewhere, and even
    there, status comes into play; a degree from your local state school
    is still likely to look a lot better to an employer than one from an
    online university or some random private college in the middle of
    nowhere that no one has heard of.

    Combine this with a federal loan system which will provide an
    ever-increasing amount of money to allow students to pay whatever
    price the colleges demand, and you don’t need a fancy model; Econ
    101 will predict uncapped price increases. No matter how terrible an
    investment a college degree is, the alternative is being frozen out
    of the white collar job market almost entirely; people will borrow
    whatever they have to. I doubt many people ever do the math to
    figure out what their lifetime earnings differential is; that’s not
    the point. The point is that if you’re raised in American middle or
    upper-middle class culture, you get a degree so you can be
    /respectable/ and not one of /those people/, the uneducated louts.
    There’s no reason for the colleges /not/ to raise money and spend it
    on whatever they want: they pay no price for doing so and will never
    have a shortage of applicants.

    The best proposal I’ve ever seen for returning college costs to
    baseline is a very simple one: make “college degree” a prohibited
    employment discrimination category. Issue tests, require
    professional certifications, fine; but the generic sheepskin would
    no longer be something the employer could ask about. I would be
    willing to bet the impact on the private economy would be nearly
    zero but higher education costs would collapse in a decade.
    (Initially, of course, businesses would be looking for every
    extra-legal way they could get around the prohibition, if for no
    other reason than that the hiring mangers are so conditioned to
    think of the college degree as the dividing line between
    civilization and the savages. But as more people started to slip
    through without degrees, and people saw there wasn’t a sudden talent
    apocalypse, I bet this would change a lot.)

    Lastly, housing price increases are up dramatically in the
    nationwide average, but this isn’t the whole story; you have to look
    at it by region
    <http://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2016/08/daily-chart-20>.
    What becomes quickly apparent is that cities which allow constant
    development have seen modest increases, while cities with
    tightly-zoned and highly regulated development markets have seen
    massive increases. Laws that stymie NIMBYism and promote
    unrestricted development could probably solve this problem in a few
    years, at the cost of wailing and gnashing of teeth from existing
    landowners who quite like the massively inflated value of their
    property. A land value tax
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_value_tax> would also solve this
    problem virtually overnight, though of course with the attendant sob
    stories about how grandma can’t afford to stay in her $3 million
    cottage she bought in 1937.

    In conclusion, none of these problems are intractable and while the
    specifics of exactly where the money is going are definitely still
    mysterious, there are some very large and obvious mechanisms that
    allow for them to grow unregulated. Addressing those seems like a
    good first step before doing any more invasive intervention, at
    least to me.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        hoghoghoghoghog says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:08 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465200>
        ~new~

        Re: NIMBYism: the weird thing is that allowing more development
        should raise the value of land to landowners. The people who
        ought to oppose unrestricted development are renters, who get
        the supposed benefits of living in under-developed
        neighbourhoods without forgoing the benefits of unrestricted
        development. And yet anecdotally I’m not seeing a huge
        correlation between NIMBYism and the proportion of people who
        own their homes. I think of Nevada and Texas as allowing
        unfettered growth, but just eyeballing it their home ownership
        rate doesn’t look super high:
        http://eyeonhousing.org/2015/03/vacancy-and-homeownership-rates-by-state-2014/

        Re: education: price-insensitivity doesn’t work as a complete
        explanation if professor salaries aren’t going up. I mean, if
        you have extra money as a college administrator, this seems like
        the obvious thing to spend it on: it will make your school more
        prestigious and will make your co-workers like you.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
          o
            JulieK says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:17 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465228>
            ~new~

            Developing your own property makes it more valuable. Your
            neighbor developing his property makes your property less
            valuable.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465200>
              +
                consolidatedcatnip says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:41 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466079>
                ~new~

                I disagree entirely. The crappiest house on a nice block
                is always going to be worth more than the nicest house
                on a crappy block. See Detroit vs Brooklyn.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465228>
          o
            Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:23 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465230>
            ~new~

            It will make your school more prestigious in the eyes of its
            *employees*, and probably overall about twenty years down
            the line. Right now, though, the thing that will make your
            school better in the eyes of your *customers* is a ten story
            dorm with a labyrinth of security gates and closet-sized rooms.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465200>
          o
            DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:41 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465239>
            ~new~

                Re: NIMBYism: the weird thing is that allowing more
                development should raise the value of land to
                landowners. The people who ought to oppose unrestricted
                development are renters, who get the supposed benefits
                of living in under-developed neighbourhoods without
                forgoing the benefits of unrestricted development.

            I would expect the opposite pattern. Rules keeping a lot of
            land off the market–80-90% of it in the Bay Area is the
            figure I have seen–mean that land where building is allowed
            is more valuable. And since it means there is less housing
            available, rents are higher, not lower.

            The losers are tenants, commuters who have to live farther
            out, and owners of land that is not allowed to be developed.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465200>
      *
        Null Hypothesis says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:10 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465264>
        ~new~

        I like many of these proscriptions. The College Degree
        discrimination especially.

        It’s also politically viable from a “blame the rich white Ivy
        League Good-Old-Boy’s” perspective. As sad as it is we need some
        sort of /them/ scapegoat to get enough motivation and public
        will to demand something good. Good can’t just be good. It has
        to be good by punishing the people responsible for the bad.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:31 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465270>
            ~new~

            One suggestion I’ve heard — and why I think that even if you
            could somehow mute the outraged academics, you’d still never
            get college degree discrimination banned — is that the
            current system is the result of anti-discrimination law, and
            specifically of disparate impact doctrine
            <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disparate_impact>.

            Employers are no longer able to issue employment or
            promotion tests unless they can prove to the satisfaction of
            a court that the test is a “business necessity”; otherwise,
            if protected minority groups test lower and consequently get
            fewer opportunities than white men, the business can be sued
            for discrimination. (And they will, just due to class/wealth
            distribution and its attendant environmental effects; you
            don’t need to even consider HBD to know the outcome.)

            But /colleges/. Well, colleges have an exemption to this
            rule. They get to filter people on admission through a
            battery of selective tests, and the more selective the
            college, the more filtering has been done — filtering the
            employer /can’t legally do themselves/. More than anything
            else, this explains the status quo to me and why businesses
            are willing to pay a premium for college graduates even for
            jobs that have nothing to do with their degree: they’re
            buying discrimination-lawsuit insulation by using an
            intermediary to filter job applicants.

            I suspect if disparate impact doctrine were eliminated by
            the courts and the burden of proof returned on plaintiffs to
            show conscious discrimination, the premium on a college
            degree would steeply decline.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465264>
              +
                Null Hypothesis says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:09 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465277>
                ~new~

                That’s a really interesting viewpoint. Companies are
                outsourcing discrimination to a privileged institution
                that’s still allowed to discriminate.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465270>
                  #
                    aldi says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 6:32 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466359>
                    ~new~

                    Here’s a supporting account from the opposite side
                    of the process
                    https://nick-black.com/dankwiki/index.php/A_dispatch_from_Terminus

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465277>
              +
                Aapje says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 9:55 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465355>
                ~new~

                It would be quite amusing (in a sad way) if the places
                where the opposition to discrimination is strongest are
                secretly the places where we outsourced discrimination to.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465270>
                  #
                    Luke the CIA Stooge says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:23 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465936>
                    ~new~

                    Trust me that’s not the 10% of it.
                    Part of the reason colleges consistently have strong
                    antidescrimination movements is because (dark dirty
                    secret) affirmative action doesn’t exist for the
                    black kids it exist for the rich white kids who want
                    to learn in a diverse environment, it’s real effect
                    is to ensure the African American kids (because
                    they’ve been admitted disproportionatly to more
                    prestigious institutions than other kids) are the
                    bottom 10% of their class and suffer all the
                    negative effects thereally of.

                    It’s hilarious! The university genuinely is hurting
                    racial minorities and the minorities know this so
                    they protest, but what do they protest for? More of
                    the hurtful policies!

                    The more you look at higher education the more you
                    see it as the cruel joke it is.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465355>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:24 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466375>
                    ~new~

                    That’s not a dark dirty secret, that’s because the
                    court cases used to justify affirmative action at
                    universities are based around the idea that
                    diversity is good for the student body in general
                    and not specifically to benefit black people. So
                    everyone pretends so..

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465355>
              +
                Edward Scizorhands says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 11:41 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465445>
                ~new~

                Employers are already banned, by SCOTUS ruling, from
                using college degrees as a filter, the same way that
                they use IQ tests. /Griggs/ said that an employer
                couldn’t use them unless they could show that they were
                required for the job.

                This hasn’t filtered down into practice, but it would
                just take a few good lawsuits to fix that. I outlined
                the grass-roots way to do this nearly two years ago:
                http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/06/06/against-tulip-subsidies/#comment-210334

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465270>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 11:47 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465448>
                    ~new~

                    I think in practice this stuff is super easy to get
                    around though. What you’re banned from doing is
                    requiring everyone take an IQ test and then
                    explicitly using IQ as a filtering criteria.

                    I work for a fairly elite-level firm that does most
                    of its recruiting on college campuses (at both the
                    undergrad and graduate level). Candidates are
                    /encouraged/ to voluntarily report their
                    SAT/GMAT/GRE scores (everyone with a decent score
                    does). When reviewing resumes, recruiting will send
                    us a “friendly reminder” that GMAT score is the most
                    accurate predictor of long-term career success we
                    have access to.

                    And what a coincidence! At the end of the day, most
                    people who report high scores get interviews, and
                    most people with lower scores don’t. And it’s all
                    nice and legal.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Edward Scizorhands says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:01 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465460>
                    ~new~

                    Courts aren’t idiots. The fact that your company
                    plays dangerously loose with the IQ test rules
                    doesn’t mean they aren’t there.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:15 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465471>
                    ~new~

                        This hasn’t filtered down into practice, but

                    There you go.

                    It really doesn’t matter if the law says you can’t
                    use either tests or college degrees, if the law, as
                    actually practiced, bans using the tests but not
                    using the college degrees. The law will affect the
                    market in the way it’s actually practiced.

                    (Also, I suspect that judges will be a lot more
                    willing to agree that college degrees are a job
                    qualification than passing an IQ test. “Everyone
                    knows” that educated people do jobs better.)

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Edward Scizorhands says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:50 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465493>
                    ~new~

                    If judges will want to go against the explicit text
                    of Griggs, okay. But they would still be going
                    against it.

                        On the record before us, neither the high school
                        completion requirement nor the general
                        intelligence test is shown to bear a
                        demonstrable relationship to successful
                        performance of the jobs for which it was used.
                        Both were adopted, as the Court of Appeals
                        noted, without meaningful study of their
                        relationship to job performance ability. Rather,
                        a vice-president of the Company testified, the
                        requirements were instituted on the Company’s
                        judgment that they generally would improve the
                        overall quality of the workforce.

                        …

                        The facts of this case demonstrate the
                        inadequacy of broad and general testing devices,
                        as well as the infirmity of using diplomas or
                        degrees as fixed measures of capability. History
                        is filled with examples of men and women who
                        rendered highly effective performance without
                        the conventional badges of accomplishment in
                        terms of certificates, diplomas, or degrees.
                        Diplomas and tests are useful servants, but
                        Congress has mandated the common sense
                        proposition that they are not to become masters
                        of reality.

                    Maybe I’m missing out on some important context and
                    the courts have already changed their mind on
                    degrees. But so far it seems like the case law is
                    sitting right there, and it’s just that no one has
                    bothered to exercise their rights to a job without a
                    degree yet.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Aapje says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 1:57 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465543>
                    ~new~

                    This thread just blows my mind. I never realized
                    that US case law was this absurd.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    lemmycaution415 says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:41 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465574>
                    ~new~

                    The IQ test in the Griggs v. Duke Power was
                    instituted as of the effective date of the Civil
                    Rights Act of 1964. The supreme court wasn’t going
                    to stand for that fuck-ery.

                    If you are not using IQ tests in an attempt to be
                    racist, you probably are going to be OK.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:55 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465582>
                    ~new~

                    @lemmycaution415

                    the many examples
                    <http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/city-pay-98-million-fdny-discrimination-case-article-1.1725702>
                    to the contrary
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ricci_v._DeStefano>
                    seem to indicate otherwise.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    lemmycaution415 says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 7:07 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465758>
                    ~new~

                    @cassander

                    The NYPD fire department had some weird racial
                    hiring issues

                    “The Fire Department is now 86% white, 9% Hispanic
                    and 5% black, according to the department’s latest
                    figures. By comparison, the NYPD is 52% white, 27%
                    Hispanic and 16% black.”

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 9:57 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465807>
                    ~new~

                    @lemmycaution415

                    >“The Fire Department is now 86% white, 9% Hispanic
                    and 5% black, according to the department’s latest
                    figures. By comparison, the NYPD is 52% white, 27%
                    Hispanic and 16% black.”

                    Why would you assume that the FD should have the
                    same racial makeup as the city, and that if it
                    doesn’t, the only possible reason is racism?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:46 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466102>
                    ~new~

                        Maybe I’m missing out on some important context
                        and the courts have already changed their mind
                        on degrees. But so far it seems like the case
                        law is sitting right there, and it’s just that
                        no one has bothered to exercise their rights to
                        a job without a degree yet.

                    Griggs was essentially thrown out by various SCOTUS
                    cases in the late ’80’s. The Civil Rights Act of
                    1991 basically codified Griggs, so the disparate
                    impact conclusions of Griggs came back. But I’m not
                    sure if a judge could actually use conclusions drawn
                    by Griggs as precedent in a current case. It might
                    be a good thing if that were the case, to fight back
                    against the irrational college premium, except that
                    I hate the disparate impact standard, and I would
                    hate to see it expanded.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:52 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466105>
                    ~new~

                        This thread just blows my mind. I never realized
                        that US case law was this absurd.

                    Yes. I think of Griggs vs Duke as one the three
                    worst SCOTUS cases ever decided (or at least within
                    my lifetime). And all three were in the ’70’s. Our
                    current SCOTUS could get a lot worse. One of the
                    other two is Roe vs Wade (has anyone here read that
                    case is full? It is logically incoherent all the way
                    through). The last one I can’t remember the name,
                    but was about religion in schools.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    Anonymous says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:21 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466170>
                    ~new~

                    What about that one which said that growing crops
                    for your own use violates government price controls
                    under the commerce clause?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
                  #
                    MartMart says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 12:38 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466239>
                    ~new~

                    It doesn’t need to be a filter as long as it can be
                    an attribute that can be considered. If I’m an
                    employer, I don’t need to say “degree required” as
                    long as a. I have more applicants than positions
                    available, and b. Some significant portion of the
                    applicants have degrees.

                    But I’m not entirely sure how we would go about
                    getting rid of that, or if it would be a good idea.
                    Even if a college does not offer any skills at all
                    (education value of 0) the degree still semi
                    certifies certain qualities like a. That person can
                    delay gratification for years at a time while the
                    work on a degree. b. They are likely coming from an
                    educated family, thus have better
                    genetics/culture/work ethic.
                    These are valuable signals to employers, who
                    genuinely need some way to separate out their
                    applicants, in a way that no test can qualify (to
                    the best of my knowledge). Training an employee is
                    expensive (more so indirectly than directly) and
                    employees need to know what their chances of success
                    are.
                    I suppose unpaid/very low paid internships are an
                    alternative, but there are plenty of problems with
                    that approach as well.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465445>
              +
                Cliff says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 1:54 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465540>
                ~new~

                On the other hand it’s way easier to get into college as
                a NAM and harder as an Asian

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465270>
      *
        Randy M says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:20 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465375>
        ~new~

        Thanks for saying a lot of sensible things. I also suspect that
        a lot of this comes down to the problem of A spending B’s money
        on C, with no one involved having any incentive to question the
        costs too finely.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
      *
        Error says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:46 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465398>
        ~new~

        Re: College degree as protected employment category.

        It seems to me like there should be an opportunity here. If
        college degrees are no longer a good signal of competence
        relative to their cost, why isn’t /somebody/ gaining competitive
        ground by just ceasing to require them? IIRC, labor is the
        largest component of budget for nearly all industries. Hire
        people who on-average are similarly competent, but will take a
        lower pay rate because they don’t have six figures of loans to
        pay off.

        Answering my own question, the IT industry seems to have already
        done this in some ways. I don’t have a degree and many others
        don’t either. OTOH, my partner works for the healthcare
        industry. Despite being hypercompetent, she’s having trouble
        advancing because of mandatory degree requirements. That seems
        like it should hurt her employer as much as her.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
          o
            Edward Scizorhands says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:45 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465447>
            ~new~

            The savings are all indirect. If the employer hires someone
            without the degree, the savings go to the employee, not to
            the company. The company would have to underpay in order to
            recognize the savings.

            In talent-starved fields, like programming, employers are
            perfectly willing to find anyone capable of doing the job.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465398>
              +
                Error says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 12:50 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465494>
                ~new~

                But they /can/underpay, because under current
                circumstances the person without the degree has a weaker
                bargaining position.

                Agreed that talent starvation can have the same effect —
                but it still feels like somebody is leaving money on the
                table here.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465447>
                  #
                    Megaflora says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:17 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466169>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t think that most businesses have any problem
                    finding literature or art history majors willing to
                    accept the same pay. There are enough underemployed
                    people with BA degrees that there is no real
                    incentive to take a risk on a lower-information
                    candidate with comparable experience.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465494>
          o
            cassander says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465554>
            ~new~

            >It seems to me like there should be an opportunity here. If
            college degrees are no longer a good signal of competence
            relative to their cost, why isn’t somebody gaining
            competitive ground by just ceasing to require them?

            A college degree might have some value and still not be
            worth its cost. e.g. if the degree costs 100k, but provides
            10k in value to an employer, it’s worth it for every
            employer to hire only grads but society as a whole comes out
            90k behind.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465398>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:27 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465608>
            ~new~

                Answering my own question, the IT industry seems to have
                already done this in some ways. I don’t have a degree
                and many others don’t either.

            One major difference is that IT is an industry where
            candidates can be easily and cheaply assessed with a /much/
            higher level of predictive quality than using a degree as a
            proxy. I can sit down with an interview candidate for an
            hour, walk them through a series of programming exercises,
            and learn far more about their suitability to the job than I
            can learn by perusing credentials on a resume. This does
            not, of course, tell me anything about their discipline,
            temperament or suitability to the soft skills of the job.
            But assessing the hard skills of a programmer or sysadmin is
            far, far easier than, say, assessing the competence of an
            attorney, project manager or public relations specialist,
            all professions that rely far more on soft skills for success.

            If the tech industry was barred from giving screening tests
            in interviews, I suspect we’d fall back on “college degree”
            as a proxy just as hard as most other industries.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465398>
      *
        Leonard says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:05 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465413>
        ~new~

        Yes, I wanted to write a comment like this.

        Scott has cost graphs for a bunch of fields that are /heavily/
        distorted by government spending, regulation, etc.

        What I’d like to see is cost graphs for fields which are the
        least influenced by the government. Whatever those might be.
        Perhaps restaurants? Apparel manufacture? Nail salons? Gyms?
        Scott does mention veterinary care as increasing a lot, which
        surprised me. That would bear further investigation.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
          o
            Matt M says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:49 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465453>
            ~new~

            I’ve always heard that veterinary care and plastic surgery
            (both significantly less regulated) have been decreasing in
            costs /relative to standard health care/. Which is probably
            worth confirming, if true.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465413>
          o
            Mediocrates says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:44 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465489>
            ~new~

            Re: market distortions in veterinary medicine, I remember
            back when I was making the rounds looking at colleges around
            2000 I interviewed with a professor who volunteered, apropos
            of not much, that vet schools were heavily cartel-ized. That
            is, they actively restrict the supply of new vets to
            engineer artificial scarcity. I don’t know that this would
            explain the slope of cost increases over time, but there you
            have it.

            I’m having trouble finding any literature on this, but a
            quote from an article
            <http://lubbockonline.com/local-news/2015-12-12/experts-debate-economic-impact-adding-vet-school>
            about a proposed vet school expansion in Texas:

            “A lot of it has to deal with existing vet schools trying to
            keep people out,” Williams said. “They are similar to an
            oligopoly power. They are a cartel.”

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465413>
              +
                MartMart says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 3:15 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466286>
                ~new~

                Re: Vets
                There is also an increase in demand at play here. If
                there is an expensive procedure to be done on a family
                pet, many people will choose to euthanize the pet
                instead (regrettably, probably, but most will spend far
                less on their dogs medical care than their
                grandparents). As people are becoming more wealthy,
                suddenly many of those procedures are going from
                completely affordable, to affordable to the wellish off
                who are sufficiently attached to their pet.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465489>
          o
            Saint Fiasco says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:11 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465551>
            ~new~

            Maybe veterinarians are like “how come those other surgeons
            are charging a lot for a basic vasectomy but when I do it on
            a dog suddenly people don’t want to pay more than 4 figures?
            I am a real doctor too!” and increase their prices.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465413>
              +
                Matt M says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 2:19 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465556>
                ~new~

                Combine this with the trend of hipster millennials who
                have dogs instead of kids and for whom “no price is too
                high!” when fido needs his operation.

                There was once a time when it would have been socially
                acceptable to simply let your dog die (or have them
                euthanized) rather than pay $5,000 for an operation. I’m
                guessing in many circles this is no longer the case.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465551>
                  #
                    Loquat says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:14 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465643>
                    ~new~

                    Hell, I’ve got an aging in-law who’ll laugh at
                    hipster millenials as much as the next old fart, but
                    she’s paying $600 for her cat to get an
                    echocardiogram, and depending on the test results
                    will be entirely willing to pay for medication
                    afterwards as long as they can supply it in some
                    form other than pills because she does /not/ want
                    the hassle of making this cat take pills.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465556>
          o
            dndnrsn says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:26 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465562>
            ~new~

            One of my parents’ cats is on fluoxetine (it was prescribed
            to prevent out-of-place urination, and appears to have done
            so, although the regression fallacy may be in play – I’m
            guessing placebo isn’t going on, since after all, cat) and
            it is, I am fairly certain, more expensive than generic
            fluoxetine would be if you got it prescribed to a human. It
            certainly is once the size of the dosage is taken into account.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465413>
              +
                Synonym Seven says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 9:22 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465799>
                ~new~

                    I’m guessing placebo isn’t going on, since after
                    all, cat

                Well, just for the sake of thoroughness… pissing on
                things is one of those classic “pay attention to me”
                signs pets do when they’re feeling neglected or
                stressed, so it’s /conceivable/ (albeit, admittedly, not
                likely) that the act of getting King Grumplewumpkins to
                take his medication provides enough attention – or gives
                him enough of an outlet to express/actualize his pent-up
                stresses – to solve the problem even if said medication
                was just chalk pills.

                Just sayin’…

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465562>
              +
                Doctor Mist says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 6:16 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466032>
                ~new~

                    I’m guessing placebo isn’t going on, since after
                    all, cat

                You happened to remind me of a study I keep hoping will
                be debunked because it makes no freaking sense to me:

                Rats Get Placebo Effect
                <http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/33468/title/Rats-Get-Placebo-Effect/>

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465562>
                  #
                    Loquat says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 8:53 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466082>
                    ~new~

                    Oh, rats can totally get the placebo effect,
                    especially if the researchers are deliberately
                    trying to induce it as they seem to have been doing
                    in this study. Relevant article here
                    <https://mosaicscience.com/story/medicine-without-the-medicine-how-to-train-your-immune-system-placebo>
                    – basically, if you spend some time teaching a rat
                    to associate an unusual stimulus with a certain
                    medical effect, like every time it gets to drink
                    sugar water it gets a certain drug, it will then
                    experience the placebo effect when given the
                    stimulus without the drug. This can be done with
                    humans too, e.g. giving a patient a weirdly flavored
                    drink with their medication and then using the drink
                    alone to stimulate a response.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466032>
              +
                dndnrsn says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 7:01 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466047>
                ~new~

                @Synonym Seven/Doctor Mist:

                Well, said cat gets plenty of attention, and I can’t
                think of any stressors that disappeared during that
                time. On the other hand, maybe there’s some kind of
                Clever Hans thing going on, and the pet notices that its
                owners are behaving differently?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465562>
      *
        neonwattagelimit says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:24 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465649>
        ~new~

        Re: your comment on infrastructure costs:

        Scott’s OP notes that several times more to build a subway in
        the US than it does in the UK or France. Both of which are
        countries that have been developed for a very long time (unlike
        Korea) and which have significant labor and environmental
        protections. I also have a hard time believing that US
        construction workers are significantly lazier than their west
        European counterparts.

        You can find some interesting work on this problem this blog
        <https://pedestrianobservations.wordpress.com/>. I’m not enough
        of an expert to say exactly why this is – I’ve read some good
        analyses that blame the US government-contracting process, or
        weird regulations, mostly around safety, that we have that other
        countries don’t – but it’s clearly not just environmental or
        labor costs and there are probably multiple factors behind it.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
      *
        teageegeepea says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:26 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465695>
        ~new~

        New cars are often status goods. Do we see a similar dynamic
        with their prices?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
      *
        RicardoCruz says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 10:01 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465908>
        ~new~

        You make a lot of points like:

            In primary and secondary education, health care and
            infrastructure, there’s a fundamental price insensitivity
            because the person consuming the service is not directly
            paying for it.

        But if this is true, why did prices start slow and got bigger
        over several decades? Why not just start big to start with? And
        why does this only happen in the USA lol?

        It’s fun to say that markets do not work, people are stupid, etc
        etc. But why is that not true across time and across countries?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:31 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466004>
            ~new~

            Well, in most countries, the answer for healthcare is
            “because the government imposes price controls and the US is
            subsidizing all the medical research for the entire world
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465843>.”


            Education is a harder one to answer. Let me throw out a few
            theories that are probably affecting it.

            First, I suspect it has at least partly to do with our
            two-party system. The NEA is a large and extremely powerful
            lobby — one of the most powerful in the country — and in a
            two-party system, sizable voting blocs have the ability to
            play “kingmaker” between two nearly-evenly-matched parties
            and extort larger concessions from the side they join than
            they might otherwise be able to achieve in a system with
            more competitive options. The NEA’s support is /crucial/ to
            the Democratic Party; without it, we would have a one-party
            system. (See the NRA for the reverse example on the
            Republican side.) So they can demand better facilities,
            better benefit packages, smaller class sizes, and so forth
            and get them. This produces less political resistance to
            increasing spending than you might otherwise have.

            I think the answer for “why slow growth, why not just go big
            to start with?” is much easier: it’s the boiling-a-frog
            parable. If you shock the system with large, sudden
            increases in spending, voters will rebel at the polls and
            you’re likely to lose them. If you very slowly increase
            spending over many years, you can extract a lot more rents
            from the system without anyone having a clear picture of
            “who’s responsible”.

            Now, that said, political lobbies and one-sided teachers’
            unions aren’t a uniquely US problem. (The UK has a very
            similar situation.) So why the US in particular?

            Probably the most interesting thing I note is that /we’re
            the only rich large nation./ We talk about countries like
            the UK and Japan as if they’re our equals, but the reality
            is that they have much smaller populations and institutions
            and actually significantly lower income. Here’s a scatter
            plot <http://d.pr/i/iSjd> I threw together of the nations of
            the world by GNI (PPP) and population, excluding China and
            India because their populations dwarf the rest of the graph
            and they aren’t really relevant to this discussion since
            their per capita GNI is so low. Note what an extreme outlier
            the US is. (For anyone curious, the unlabeled outliers on
            the far right of the GNI axis are Kuwait and Qatar.)

            If we hypothesize that:

            A.) Organizations which grow larger become less efficient
            due to exponentially increasing coordination costs between
            all of their components and the inability of supervising
            entities to closely monitor all components for inefficiencies.

            B.) Organizations will find ways to consume whatever
            resources are available to consume, as each individual in
            the organization attempts to maximize their own personal
            benefits from membership.

            …then it suggests that the US both /can/ and /will/ garner
            “inefficiencies of scale” unprecedented for any other nation
            simply because we operate on a larger scale and have the
            resources available.

            If you look at our spending on education in absolute terms,
            it’s staggeringly inefficient compared to other countries.
            But look at it in GDP adjusted terms
            <https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cmd.asp> and
            it’s actually middle of the pack for OECD countries. This
            suggests to me that our level of waste and inefficiency is
            at least in part a side effect of being able to /tolerate/
            it without the government going bankrupt.

            Beyond that, I don’t really have any guesses as to what’s
            special about us. My original post was mostly pointing out
            that there are some obvious market deficiencies that can be
            corrected based solely on economic principles; reducing the
            known and obvious factors that impede markets from doing
            their efficiency-optimizing job might help flush out the
            less-obvious inefficiencies in our system.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465908>
      *
        sharper13 says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 3:11 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465986>
        ~new~

        Yeah, the commonalities in the sectors where “cost disease”
        exists are indirect payers and the level of regulation
        (including licensing), usually both.

        Compare Lasik costs over time (which typically isn’t 3rd party
        paid) to health care. Compare housing cost changes in rural
        areas, or in metro Phoenix, Houston and Dallas to those in SF &
        NY. The numbers aren’t in because he hasn’t started yet, but if
        Elon Musk builds a tunnel below his own property, does anyone
        doubt it’ll cost way less than if the city did it?

        What are the differences between those which magically make them
        not have the same massive cost increases? The answers are pretty
        obvious.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465179>
          o
            MathEpic says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 3:33 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465997>
            ~new~

            I will concede that regulations add a little to cost
            disease, but I am skeptical regarding your implication that
            it is the most significant factor.

            Consider: As far as I can tell, food safety is regulated
            almost as heavily as medicine, and considerably more heavily
            then higher education. Nevertheless, the cost of food has
            not skyrocketed the way the other industries have.

            The market for laser eye surgery actually fits my model
            quite well. Getting eye correction is nice, but as a society
            we do not feel it is essential. Lots of people wear glasses
            and are content. (I have a brother that could have the
            procedure done, but had declined because he “likes the way
            glasses frame [his] face.”) As a society we feel that going
            with the cheaper option (glasses) is valid, so we have not
            seen cost disease in this field.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465986>
              +
                John Schilling says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 7:59 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466060>
                ~new~

                    Consider: As far as I can tell, food safety is
                    regulated almost as heavily as medicine,

                If that were the case, one could not open a restaurant
                without a postgraduate degree in nutrition and food
                safety (equivalent to a compounding pharmacist), and
                Hormel would have had to spend a few hundred million
                dollars on human trials for safety and nutrition when
                they invented Spam.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465997>
17.
    qwints says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:31 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465181>
    ~new~

    As a lawyer, I perceive your comments about med mail lawsuits as
    pure insurance company propaganda. Have we seen any change in
    defensive medicine in the tort reform states? The psych consult for
    depression seems better explained by medical systems set up to
    maximize revenue.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Jack says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:43 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465186>
        ~new~

        There is a book about this: David Engel, The Myth of the
        Litigious Society
        <http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo21571969.html>.
        Another factor could be insurance-company-induced-yet-unfounded
        fear of lawsuits. It seems unlikely that doctors carefully
        calibrate their referrals against a legal analysis of the
        likelihood of being sued.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465181>
      *
        as1018 says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 8:16 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465315>
        ~new~

        I am a physician.
        It is not just the malpractice concerns. I have never been sued.
        Physicians routinely face other situations that produce fear.
        The kind of fear that keeps us awake at night.
        In my case, I have had to face being reported to the state
        licensing board. It wasn’t because I had done substandard care.
        I reported a neglected child to protective services. An infant
        who had lost 10% of her body weight due to neglect by the dad’s
        family.
        The parents were going through a divorce. The dad’s lawyer filed
        a lengthy complaint against me with the state board. Mostly, it
        contended that I shouldn’t have reported the case to protective
        services. The lawyer had to know that I am mandated by state law
        to do such reporting. It was clearly retaliation for my action.
        Of course, the case against me was dismissed. But it took three
        years and thousands of dollars to clear my name.
        I know many physicians who have the same sorts of nuisance
        complaints. It takes an emotional toll whenever things like this
        arise. I felt bullied and this case is one of many reasons that
        I am leaving primary care. I can live a better life without
        worrying every minute who will pop out and attack me. I
        dedicated my career to helping low income patients and I even
        spent years helping with the local charity clinic but the
        postives I have gotten are minimal compared to the emotional
        stress involved on a daily basis.
        Good bye medicine forever.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465181>
          o
            Randy M says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:24 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465378>
            ~new~

                The parents were going through a divorce. The dad’s
                lawyer filed a lengthy complaint against me with the
                state board. Mostly, it contended that I shouldn’t have
                reported the case to protective services. The lawyer had
                to know that I am mandated by state law to do such
                reporting. It was clearly retaliation for my action.

            It might not have been retaliation (though you’d know more
            than I) so much as wanting to be able to dispute the child
            endangerment charge in the divorce proceedings–the lawyer
            can point out that the doctor was later investigated for
            making that allegation, so it shouldn’t be considered in
            establishing custody, or something.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465315>
              +
                Anonymousse says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 9:48 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466615>
                ~new~

                The lawyer can cite an investigation they brought into
                being as reason for dismissing the charge? That
                seems…improper.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465378>
                  #
                    Randy M says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:24 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466779>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t know what they *can* do, but it seems like
                    if the investigation was ongoing they could imply it
                    had merit, or at least wasn’t thrown out.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466615>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:48 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466836>
                    ~new~

                    An investigation might also help demonstrate the
                    seriousness of the complaint. If the doctor made an
                    unreasonable allegation, why wouldn’t the person
                    complain?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466615>
                  #
                    as1018 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 4:09 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466881>
                    ~new~

                    This is interesting because the law mandates that I
                    must report any suspected child abuse. It says that
                    I am not to investigate any charges but if there is
                    any suspicion, I must report or risk losing my
                    license. My lawyer has had to defend physicians who
                    did not report and then faced loss of their license.
                    The law also says that I am protected legally when I
                    report in good faith.
                    Obviously, lawyers feel that this part of the law
                    does not pertain to them.
                    In my case, the reporting was clearly vindictive. It
                    was not a simple report. It had items in it that I
                    think could have represented slander. I considered
                    reporting the lawyer to the bar but I did not want
                    to create an environment of escalating accusations.
                    I did this to protect my peace of mind.
                    The important point I am making that seems entirely
                    missed is how this impacts malpractice concerns.
                    I think every doctor probably knows someone in the
                    profession that has had to deal with being reported
                    to licensing boards over cases that have little or
                    no merit. Like this case. These cases always drag on
                    for years before being resolved. While they drag on,
                    I have to report it when I do my annual license
                    renewal and explain what is happening in the case
                    just the same as I would have to if I had a
                    malpractice case filed against me. Just being
                    reported creates a blot on my record that does not
                    go away until the the case is resolved and closed.
                    These cases get lumped emotionally into the same
                    basket as being sued. The impact is that physicians
                    look at everything they do as having the potential
                    to backfire and they worry all the time about
                    nuisance law suits.
                    So when studies only look at the number of lawsuits
                    and defensive practice of medicine, they are missing
                    the boat. They are not looking at all the ways that
                    physicians face legal actions and they are not
                    looking at how many of them are not justified in the
                    end but are just the result of someone with an ax to
                    grind.
                    Lawyers typically underestimate the emotional toll
                    this places on practitioners. The person who filed a
                    note to the board wasn’t even one of my patients but
                    was the lawyer of the patient’s grandparents. How in
                    the world can I protect myself against something
                    like that? The years it took to resolve were very
                    emotionally challenging. I feel that the lawyer was
                    a bully who was trying to get back at me for my
                    reporting and I have not seen any evidence that
                    contradicts this. I had to supply medical records
                    and several sets of testimony about my practice. I
                    worried the entire time. Even though I felt I had
                    done nothing wrong and my lawyer told me there was
                    no problem with my records, I still worried that I
                    could be found at fault for some obscure reason.
                    This sort of situation wears on physicians in
                    practice and it is just one of many factors that
                    lead me to retire early. I know many other
                    physicians who are reacting similarly by early
                    retirement, by restricting their practice and,
                    sadly, by committing suicide. The medical profession
                    has a high suicide rate compared to many other
                    groups in the US.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466615>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:31 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465612>
            ~new~

                …I am leaving primary care.

            Just idle curiosity, but what field are you going into
            instead? I’m kind of curious what other careers make for a
            smooth transition from medicine.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465315>
              +
                as1018 says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 4:26 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465652>
                ~new~

                I have diversified.
                I have a small farm to reduce food costs.
                I have several small businesses that make money through
                the Internet and I am just starting to do consulting for
                other physicians who are looking for a way out.
                I never had an enormous income since I was in primary
                care and I currently live in a house with a paid off
                mortgage. These things help a lot.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465612>
      *
        Edward Scizorhands says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:47 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465449>
        ~new~

        /Have we seen any change in defensive medicine in the tort
        reform states?/

        Tort reform typically caps damages. This is irrelevant for the
        problem Scott discussed. Being sued for $50,000 or $500,000 is
        the same nightmare to the doctor.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465181>
          o
            Cliff says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:56 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465542>
            ~new~

            A damage cap of $50k would prevent most claims from being
            brought in the first place

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465449>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:33 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465613>
            ~new~

            Damage caps reduce the number of suits. Being sued for
            $50,000 is not a nightmare to a doctor because it doesn’t
            happen–a plaintiff would not recoup their costs. Tort
            reforms also include more direct ways to reduce the
            likelihood of suits. In Texas for instance, insurance
            companies changed the definition of negligence, adopting “a
            ‘willful and wanton’ negligence standard — interpreted as
            intentionally harming the patient — for emergency care”.
            <http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/25/us/even-with-counsel-texas-amputee-is-hindered-by-state-tort-laws.html>

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465449>
      *
        Garrett says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:42 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465623>
        ~new~

        I volunteer in EMS. I once committed a reportable medical error
        (medication error, no resultant harm). This involved me having
        my ability to practice suspended for several weeks, followed by
        an hour-long meeting with my partner, service director, medical
        director, EMS coordinator, and at least one other person.
        Followed by a “don’t do that again”. It’s one of the more
        dreadful things I’ve dealt with in the past few years. And this
        was for something that wasn’t life-altering. My livelyhood
        wouldn’t be impacted in any way.

        Most of medical regulation is covered by civil (rather than
        criminal) statute. Ignoring claims for damages, there’s also the
        regulatory process. Having your license stripped isn’t something
        subject to criminal due process. It’s a professional board.
        Which means that the standards are lower. The stakes are also
        higher. If you have your license revoked you’re basically a
        fresh college graduate without any expertise trying to find a job.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465181>
          o
            qwints says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:29 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465823>
            ~new~

            I haven’t experienced either, but I’d prefer being a fresh
            college graduate without experience to a convicted criminal
            when job hunting.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465623>
          o
            shakeddown <https://shakeddown.wordpress.com/> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:49 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465828>
            ~new~

            Is the worst-case scenario there that you lose your EMS
            license, or can it effect your non-EMS related life? (I
            guess in principle you can be sued for malpractice, but how
            often does that actually happen, and is there some sort of
            insurgence insurance to protect volunteers?)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465623>
              +
                Garrett says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 4:33 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466900>
                ~new~

                A few things. This wasn’t a criminal issue (I suppose I
                could have been tried for practicing medicine without a
                license, but that wouldn’t have gone anywhere).

                From memory from EMS class (yes, this is covered early
                in EMT class as a part of the standard curriculum), the
                basic requirements for a tort:
                1) Duty to act.
                2) Breach of duty.
                3) Harm
                4) Proximate cause between 2 & 3.

                There was no harm. So elements 3 & 4 wouldn’t be met.
                Thus no suit in this case.

                What about a bigger problem? Say I’d caused injury or
                death. Well, unless they can turn it into a criminal
                case by claiming that I intended to cause injury, a
                civil suit might arise. In that case, there’s be several
                people to point fingers at:
                1) The ambulance service.
                2) My medical director.
                3) Me.

                In order, the ambulance service is the usual target of
                EMS lawsuits. This is because they usually have large
                insurance policies, and much deeper pockets.

                My medical director is the doctor who approves me
                providing delegated medical care under protocols. My
                general experience is that most of what doctors do these
                days is to act as a liability and paperwork sponge so
                that other people can get real work done. He has a big
                insurance policy. It would probably be hard to get
                actual money out of my medical director, but a lawsuit
                could probably make enough paperwork hassle that it
                would be worth settling.

                Finally, me. As a volunteer, I’m protected by my State’s
                Good Samaritan laws, which tend to up the requirements
                to “gross negligence” to file suit. That’s a hard
                standard to achieve with someone who’s trying to do the
                right thing. Next, I was working as an agent of the
                ambulance service, so liability can be deflected that
                way. Finally, I carry an umbrella liability insurance
                policy to protect myself.

                My full-time career is unrelated to healthcare, so even
                assuming my cert got yanked, it wouldn’t be detrimental.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465828>
18.
    Brandon Berg says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:45 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465188>
    ~new~

    It’s worth pointing out that tuition sticker price is a terrible
    measure of college costs. At public colleges, subsidies make tuition
    lower than the true cost, and at elite private colleges, the sticker
    price is often set very high and then discounted on an individual
    basis with need-based aid.

    I suspect it’s more or less inevitable that the price of housing and
    services would increase in response to plummeting real costs of
    manufacturing goods. What else are people going to spend their money
    on? Something’s going to soak up the extra money; why not those things?

    (Edit: I’m not saying these things couldn’t be delivered more
    efficiently, just that even if they were, we’d just buy more of
    them. Grad school could become the new new high school).

    I’m also skeptical that standards of living are stagnating.
    Americans are living longer, in bigger and higher-quality housing,
    and spending more time in education and retirement and less in
    employment. And cheap manufactured goods. I’m aware of the real
    income statistics (although note that this is in part due to
    changing household composition, with fewer two-income households and
    more single-woman households), but given that on balance other
    statistics show a rising standard of living, it seems more likely to
    me that CPI calculations are not sufficiently capturing hedonic
    improvements.

    Finally, you should never say, without qualification, that income
    inequality is increasing. Global income inequality has been
    declining for decades. More importantly, the global poor and middle
    class have seen great increases in absolute standard of living. This
    is a huge deal and horribly underreported. Yes, it’s unfortunate
    that standards of living for people in the 80th to 98th percentiles
    of the global income distribution have not risen as quickly as we
    might have liked, but overall, the trends of the past thirty years
    have been very good for most of the world.

    Edit: Forgot to add that living paycheck-to-paycheck is something
    that people do in a wide variety of economic circumstances and
    probably has more to do with psychology than with economics. A lot
    of people will live the most expensive lifestyles their incomes
    allow and thus fail to save money regardless of their economic
    circumstances.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        youzicha says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:28 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465336>
        ~new~

        Jadagul wrote on tumblr about the college cost graph [1
        <http://jadagul.tumblr.com/post/156948032713/college-costs-are-poorly-reported-on>,2
        <http://jadagul.tumblr.com/post/156949522263/wirehead-wannabe-replied-to-your-post-college>].
        He shows graphs for net price as well as sticker price, e.g. the
        net price for private colleges only increased by 18% over twenty
        years, even though the sticker price increased by 94%.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465188>
          o
            AnonEEmous says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:40 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465620>
            ~new~

            if the net price is only 18%, doesn’t that imply that the
            extra 76% is being shouldered by taxpayers? And doesn’t that
            argue for taxpayers not wanting to shoulder the burden for
            people who don’t already receive subsidies and so forth? Or
            just shoulder an additional burden generally?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465336>
              +
                youzicha says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:55 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465822>
                ~new~

                Hm, I guess that curve includes federal grants and tax
                credits, so part of it could be shouldered by taxpayers.
                But also a big difference between the sticker and net
                price is the institutional tuition discounts
                <https://trends.collegeboard.org/college-pricing/figures-tables/institutional-tuition-discount-income-private-institutions>,
                which is just adjusting the price. It would be useful if
                someone could figure out how big the different
                components are.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465620>
      *
        youzicha says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:48 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465349>
        ~new~

            What else are people going to spend their money on?
            Something’s going to soak up the extra money; why not those
            things?

        I guess Scott and John Maynard Keynes gave a suggestion for
        something else: leisure.

        Indeed, maybe you could tell a story here by comparing the U.S.
        and Europe? Since 1950, the number of working hours in Europe
        apparently
        <https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/06/how-did-work-life-balance-in-the-us-get-so-awful/276336/>
        declined between two and four times faster than in the U.S.
        Meanwhile, the growth of cost of education and health care was
        much faster in the U.S. than in Europe. It seems like European
        workers chose to spend their increased wealth by taking more
        vacation, while U.S. workers used it to bid up education and
        health care costs? ☺

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465188>
      *
        Randy M says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:27 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465380>
        ~new~

            It’s worth pointing out that tuition sticker price is a
            terrible measure of college costs. At public colleges,
            subsidies make tuition lower than the true cost, and at
            elite private colleges, the sticker price is often set very
            high and then discounted on an individual basis with
            need-based aid.

        Probably true, but looking at the other end, the debt students
        leave college with, doesn’t paint a very different picture, does it?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465188>
      *
        TheAncientGeekAKA1Z <https://pierrephilosophique.wordpress.com/>
        says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:51 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465402>
        ~new~

        Sounds plausible. Im reminded of the way no one in Europe
        worries much about robots taking their jobs because everyone
        takes that to mean living a leisured existence supported by the
        state.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465188>
      *
        Edward Scizorhands says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:49 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465452>
        ~new~

        /And then discounted on an individual basis with need-based aid./

        This is classic price discrimination. They charge exactly as
        much as they can to each party. Salespeople in other fields
        would kill for this kind of pricing power.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465188>
19.
    sandorzoo says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:51 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465190>
    ~new~

    What’s the correlation coefficient between the cost increases here,
    and the ratio of (#words in the federal tax code)/(real GDP)? Seems
    decently likely that both have the same underlying causes.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
20.
    hoghoghoghoghog says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:57 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465193>
    ~new~

    What happens if you randomly choose 3 service goods (e.g. plumbing,
    butlers, restaurants) and see how their prices have changed? If you
    look at the interval from 1900 to 1930, can you find 3 industries
    whose prices increased similarly to how healthcare, education and
    subway construction changed in the last 30 years?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
21.
    sandorzoo says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:00 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465194>
    ~new~

    From my experience, it seems very likely that most people (even
    lawyers) have close to zero ability to judge legal risk, and
    literally can’t tell the difference between probability = 40% and
    probability = 0.0004%. Texas has made it extraordinarily difficult
    to win med mal cases, but how many doctors in Texas know
    specifically what the legal standards are and how the economics work
    (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4lhuN-gpwqo)? Let alone other
    groups like nurses, hospital administrators, contractors, etc., who
    can all increase costs through fear of nearly nonexistent risks.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
22.
    konshtok says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:00 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465195>
    ~new~

    The extra money must be going somewhere

    If prices have been increasing so dramatically while wages and
    profits have not then there must be another section of the american
    economy that has had a huge increase in profits without an increase
    in productivity

    building contractors? milo yiannopoulosi (if that is the right
    plural) ? somewhere else?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Brandon Berg says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:17 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465207>
        ~new~

        Well, there’s finance, and to a lesser extent software. But
        “stagnant wages” doesn’t mean stagnant labor costs. If you hire
        more workers, your labor costs go up, even if you keep paying
        the same salary. That’s definitely part of what’s happening with
        education.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465195>
      *
        Winter Shaker says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:39 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465342>
        ~new~

        My sketchy memory of Classical Greek wants to pluralise it as
        ‘Yiannopouloi’, but I have no idea how that differs from Modern
        Greek.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465195>
          o
            AnonEEmous says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:41 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465621>
            ~new~

            i like yiannopouloi too

            not just in the sense of pronunciation either 🙂

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465342>
23.
    actinide meta says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:09 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465201>
    ~new~

    Read the story Positive Feedback
    <http://hell.pl/szymon/Baen/1635%20The%20Eastern%20Front/Prescription%20for%20Chaos/1416591435__13.htm>
    by Christopher Anvil. When I read it originally, I was rolling my
    eyes because it was such a transparent allegory for the recent
    history of rising health care costs. Then I realized it was
    published in 1965!

    (I hope that the copy of the story I linked to is authorized — what
    are the terms of Baen’s Free Library? — but I’m not sure. You can
    buy the collection “Prescription for Chaos” from Amazon or Baen.)

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
24.
    eqdw says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:10 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465202>
    ~new~

        If we give everyone free college education, that solves a big
        social problem.

    Sincere question: What social problem? Along the theme of going back
    to how things were 50 years ago: 50 years ago people were more than
    capable of having self sufficient adult lives straight out of
    highschool.

    It’s true, the world has changed, and perhaps we need more and
    more-specialized educations to be productive now. On the flip side,
    there’s truth in the idea that our grandparents fought the nazis at
    age 16, while our 25 year olds today need safe spaces from them.
    People coming out of high school are fundamentally unequipped for
    life, and it didn’t used to be like this.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Acedia says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:15 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465227>
        ~new~

            People coming out of high school are fundamentally
            unequipped for life

        Yeah. But can we admit that’s at least /partially/ down to
        increases in the complexity of life, rather than decreases in
        the quality of people? I know you admitted “the world has
        changed”, but I don’t think you’re giving enough credit to the
        hypothesis that carving out a space in the economy is just more
        a lot more difficult for a person of average intelligence now
        than it was then.

        My father who left high school in New Zealand in the late
        sixties speaks of decently-paid unskilled work being so abundant
        that on multiple occasions he outright quit a job in order to
        take off with his band for a couple weeks, totally confident he
        could get another one instantly when he came back. That was
        unremarkable to him at the time but it sounds insane to modern ears.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            ThirteenthLetter says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:18 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465811>
            ~new~

            What is the complexity of life that a college degree would
            help anyone with? (For that matter, it strikes me that
            “getting a college degree” is one of the most complicated
            things you can do already.)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465227>
              +
                dndnrsn says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:54 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465821>
                ~new~

                In my experience, it has really helped in being able to
                deal with bureaucracy. Or at least not getting as
                frustrated when dealing with it.

                Of course, this is not what university is/meant/ to do,
                but having some experience of it from an institution
                with a few thousand or tens of thousands of people under
                its umbrella is good if you have to deal with a larger
                institution than that, like some level of government or
                other.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465811>
      *
        Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:31 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465235>
        ~new~

        “It would be nice if everyone had the option of going to
        college, without needing to invest more than the time needed to
        complete their degree.”

        Not every social problem is Nazis-levels of serious. That
        doesn’t mean we can’t consider them and discuss possible
        solutions. Also, as I understand it, the current fashion among
        24-year-olds is in fact Nazi-punching, so there may yet be hope
        for the youth of the nation, or something.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            eyeballfrog says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 11:59 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465457>
            ~new~

            More accurately, the fashion is to call people they disagree
            with Nazis, then punch them. Somewhat less noble.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465235>
              +
                aldi says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 6:54 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466364>
                ~new~

                well I’ve seen no evidence of that. But the most
                prominent punchees this year are the people who were
                loudly shouting “heil trump, heil victory”. Surely that
                can function as an admission of guilt?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465457>
                  #
                    Loquat says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 11:04 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466424>
                    ~new~

                    Here, have some evidence.
                    <http://www.mmamania.com/2017/2/2/14484534/uc-berkeley-video-ufc-jake-shields-rescues-man-beaten-masked-fascist-thugs-during-violent-protest>

                    Specifically, the second video, which apparently was
                    taken in Berkeley right after a group of Black Bloc
                    was interrupted whilst attacking one fleeing man in
                    a Trump hat. The word “Nazi” is deployed about 20
                    seconds in. Was either Milo or any of the attendees
                    who got attacked in the streets shouting “heil” to
                    anything?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466364>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 11:15 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466428>
                    ~new~

                    Let’s be clear. Eyeballfrog’s implication was that
                    “the fashion is to call people they disagree with
                    Nazis [more or less only on the basis that they
                    disagree]”. Your example might not have involved
                    heils, might not have been a “most prominent
                    punchee” either, but in any case is one where people
                    have reasons beyond simple disagreement for calling
                    them Nazis. Specifically, I would hazard,
                    Yiannopoulos’s stated views on Muslim people.
                    Whether they are good reasons though is a can of worms.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466364>
      *
        DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:46 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465241>
        ~new~

            50 years ago people were more than capable of having self
            sufficient adult lives straight out of highschool.

        Currently, Amish manage to do quite well with an eighth grade
        education. They are successful farmers, using much, although not
        all, modern agricultural technology, and successful small scale
        entrepreneurs.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            consolidatedcatnip says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 9:14 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466089>
            ~new~

            Yes, utilizing untold thousands of unpaid man-hours in labor
            from their children and other family members to undercut
            more expensive producers of various specialty crop (who have
            to, you know, pay wages to their employees). In Ohio, for
            example, they basically own the market for organic tomatoes,
            to such an extent that an Ohio State Extension
            horticulturalist advised against going into the business,
            because you will never be able to compete with them on price
            or quality. A family of 9: competitive advantage or market
            distortion?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465241>
              +
                DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 2:39 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466270>
                ~new~

                It’s almost certainly true that the average Amish works
                more hours per day than the average non-Amish. But so
                far as the resulting output, that whole family is
                producing enough to support a reasonably good modern
                standard of living minus a few modern conveniences,
                mainly automobiles and in house telephones, that they
                don’t want. And they are doing it with a family labor
                force all of which has at most an eighth grade education.

                Further, they are doing it despite some restrictions
                that raise production cost, such as horse drawn vehicles
                and no connection to the power grid.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466089>
                  #
                    IrishDude says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:33 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466298>
                    ~new~

                    Naive question on the Amish (just in case you happen
                    to know): Do they read books for knowledge or
                    entertainment? Just the bible? It would be
                    interesting and surprising to me if they kept up
                    with the outside world’s
                    culture/entertainment/science by reading material
                    from off the farms.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:29 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466378>
                    ~new~

                    Competing on who works the most leads to a race to
                    the bottom where everyone works maximally and has
                    minimal leisure time. The Amish are basically saying
                    “we don’t care about leisure time” and using that to
                    undercut non-Amish who do care about leisure time.

                    In one sense, this is just the market at work, but
                    I’m not libertarian to that extent.

                    You could also compare what the Amish are doing to
                    dumping of subsidized goods, except the goods are hours.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    MathEpic says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 10:54 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466669>
                    ~new~

                    I am not convinced looking at production advantages
                    is the right way to consider the Amish.

                    As far as I understand, the Amish put great store in
                    being self sufficient and they try to supply each
                    other rather then get things from outside suppliers.
                    As a result, they only need to have a comparatively
                    small income from outsiders to balance payments.

                    From basic economics, if two trading partners have a
                    shared currency and party A is bad at producing
                    exports then the value of that currency will be
                    fairly high for party A. Eventually, party A can
                    accept lower and lower wages and still maintain a
                    similar quality of life. Eventually, the exports
                    from A will be so cheap that party B will start
                    buying from A, and exports from B will be so
                    expensive that A could not buy any of them. Thereby,
                    balance of payments is restored.

                    Thus from the outside, they may sell a pastry for
                    $.50 (compared to a $1.50 pastry from your local
                    food-mart) and we think “They must be efficient”,
                    not realizing that the pastry took ten times as many
                    man hours to make as the supermarket pastry of the
                    same quality. (Okay, the Amish pastry is probably of
                    higher quality. I remember that it was a good pastry.)

                    My speculation here is not based on anything more
                    then my memory of a few interactions I had with
                    these people I had more then a decade ago, but I
                    haven’t seen any data to disprove it.

                    Does anyone have such data?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:24 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466483>
                    ~new~

                        The Amish are basically saying “we don’t care
                        about leisure time” and using that to undercut
                        non-Amish who do care about leisure time.

                    I’m not sure what you mean by “undercut.” If the
                    only difference between A and B is that A works ten
                    hours a day and B works eight hours a day, we would
                    expect A to make about 25% more income than B. Why
                    would that seem to you to be a problem or unfair?

                    The Amish clearly have some leisure, but they value
                    work and, I think, do more of it than most other
                    Americans. They also value their social structure
                    and believe that some modern technologies would
                    erode it, so choose not to use those technologies.
                    The first choice raises their income, the second
                    lowers it. I don’t see anything problematic about
                    either.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:26 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466484>
                    ~new~

                    @IrishDude:

                    They certainly read some things for knowledge or
                    entertainment–there are several publications by and
                    for Amish, largely, I gather, about what is going on
                    in the Amish world. My impression is that they read
                    books with what they see as useful information. They
                    use a good deal of modern agricultural technology,
                    although not all, so would probably value relevant
                    texts. Less likely to be interested in what they
                    would see as useless knowledge.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    FacelessCraven says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:46 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466497>
                    ~new~

                    @Jiro – “In one sense, this is just the market at
                    work, but I’m not libertarian to that extent.”

                    …I’m sure no matter what one’s political persuasion,
                    there’s always horror to be found in the SSC
                    comments. For me, it’s these threads on the Amish.
                    You are saying that running a farm with your kin
                    should be prohibited?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:51 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466503>
                    ~new~

                        If the only difference between A and B is that A
                        works ten hours a day and B works eight hours a
                        day, we would expect A to make about 25% more
                        income than B. Why would that seem to you to be
                        a problem or unfair?

                    I’m not concerned that A is making too much income;
                    I’m concerned that this is pricing B out of the
                    market. Imagine if the Amish were running steel
                    plants at a loss solely so that, for religious
                    reasons, they could sell steel for less than it cost
                    to make it. This would result in non-Amish steel
                    plants going out of business, and the more steel the
                    Amish dump, the more non-Amish would be out of a
                    job. And since they have religious reasons for
                    dumping steel, the usual libertarian argument–that
                    it isn’t possible to dump steel and remain
                    profitable–doesn’t apply. They can dump the steel
                    forever and use donations to keep their plants
                    operating.

                    It’s the same thing, using farms instead of steel,
                    and donating their labor rather than donating money
                    to keep the Amish steel plants afloat.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:02 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466511>
                    ~new~

                        You are saying that running a farm with your kin
                        should be prohibited?

                    I think that doing so should be prohibited when the
                    kin are used to run the farm instead of giving them
                    an education. If possible, I also think it should be
                    prohibited when the kin are used to run the farm
                    because, lacking an education in the past, their
                    ability to do things other than help on the farm is
                    sharply curtailed. (Particularly when this is
                    deliberate policy on the part of the Amish to ensure
                    that the next generation can’t leave).

                    If they can avoid that, they can be left alone, but
                    I think that the fact that they are doing this is
                    harmful to others and should not be praised. Like
                    libertarians, I don’t assume that “bad”
                    automatically means “should be prohibited”.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    CatCube says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:33 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466523>
                    ~new~

                    @Jiro

                    I’m not sure what you mean here…it’s not possible to
                    run a steel mill below cost for long periods,
                    because as soon as your bank accounts run dry you
                    stop paying your bills and your suppliers will stop
                    sending you inputs.

                    Same thing with farming…unless the Amish have
                    massive savings I was previously unaware of, they’re
                    going to go bankrupt in short order if they don’t
                    recoup their costs.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:45 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466530>
                    ~new~

                        it’s not possible to run a steel mill below cost
                        for long periods, because as soon as your bank
                        accounts run dry you stop paying your bills

                    In the hypothetical, the Amish can run a steel mill
                    at below cost because, for religious reasons, they
                    donate money to the steel mill, so the steel mill’s
                    bank accounts never run dry.

                    In the actual situation, they are donating labor to
                    farms for religious reasons instead, so that the
                    cost of running the farm is below the cost of
                    running a non-Amish farm that doesn’t benefit from
                    donated labor.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:59 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466539>
                    ~new~

                        Imagine if the Amish were running steel plants
                        at a loss solely so that, for religious reasons,
                        they could sell steel for less than it cost to
                        make it.

                    I don’t see what that has to do with Amish choosing
                    to work more hours, but I also don’t see what’s
                    wrong with it for anyone but the Amish. In your
                    story they are generously providing the rest of us
                    with steel at below what it costs us to make steel.
                    Do you also feel that they would be hurting us if
                    they just happened to be better at making steel than
                    we were? If not, what’s the difference?

                    I also don’t see why, if a foreign government
                    subsidizes exports to the U.S., we should complain
                    at their generosity.

                    This whole argument seems to assume some sort of
                    absolute advantage model of trade, along with the
                    mercantilist assumption that exporting is good and
                    importing bad.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:31 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466728>
                    ~new~

                        As far as I understand, the Amish put great
                        store in being self sufficient and they try to
                        supply each other rather then get things from
                        outside suppliers.

                    That’s a considerable exaggeration. When other
                    farmers stopped using horses the Amish had a
                    problem, since nobody was producing the equipment
                    they needed for horse-drawn agriculture. For a while
                    they made do by buying second hand and repairing,
                    but eventually they developed their own little
                    industry of producing stuff for their own use. And
                    Amish, like some other people, like to eat
                    vegetables they grow themselves.

                    But Amish producers of products such as milk
                    routinely sell to the same middle men as non-Amish,
                    and much of what they buy comes from non-Amish.
                    Amish taxicabs, local non-Amish who provide
                    transport to Amish, are a common pattern.

                    As best I can tell, literal self-sufficiency has
                    never been a part of their doctrine. What is part of
                    their doctrine is avoiding entanglement with the
                    world. Working as an employee of a non-Amish
                    employer is permitted, even common in some areas,
                    but disfavored. I think partnership with a non-Amish
                    would be forbidden by the /ordnung/ of most or all
                    Old Order Amish congregations. But buying from and
                    selling to non-Amish isn’t an issue.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 4:12 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466888>
                    ~new~

                        I don’t see what that has to do with Amish
                        choosing to work more hours

                    It’s basically the same thing, except that they’re
                    dumping farm-labor-hours instead of steel.

                        In your story they are generously providing the
                        rest of us with steel at below what it costs us
                        to make steel. Do you also feel that they would
                        be hurting us if they just happened to be better
                        at making steel than we were? If not, what’s the
                        difference?

                    If they were actually better at making steel, ithey
                    would be causing technological unemployment. I
                    believe that technological unemployment is a real
                    problem which can be serious, so yes they would be
                    hurting someone.

                    Having a world where nobody advances in technology
                    is seriously bad, especially in the long term, so
                    the /overall/ effect of making steel cheaper is
                    good, because it balances the benefit of
                    technological progress against the harm to people
                    who become unemployed. The harm is /still there/,
                    however, and in other situations where the balance
                    is different, may be part of an overall harmful effect.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466270>
      *
        Mr Mind says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:29 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465287>
        ~new~

            On the flip side, there’s truth in the idea that our
            grandparents fought the nazis at age 16, while our 25 year
            olds today need safe spaces from them.

        Survivorship bias. Those who were not equipped died, in spades.
        We only see today the few that were equipped for whatever prior
        reason or lucky enough.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            John Schilling says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465512>
            ~new~

            Servicemen in the United States Army and Navy suffered a
            roughly 2.5% mortality rate during World War II. The
            Merchant Marine was a bit more dangerous at 4.3%. Even the
            /Soviet/ army only managed 20% mortality during WW2. So, not
            a significant factor I think.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465287>
              +
                bean says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 1:20 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465519>
                ~new~

                Not only that, the places with the highest mortality
                were generally the ones with the least individual
                control over their survival. Everyone’s submarine
                services had far and away the highest mortality rates.
                Yet it’s really hard to see how the capability of an
                individual enlisted submariner is going to make a big
                difference to his life or death. The capability of his
                captain is orders of magnitude more important, and luck
                more important still.
                (The British Merchant Navy was close to 20%, IIRC, but
                the same applies to them.)

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465512>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 3:37 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465618>
                    ~new~

                    My grandfather was a newly-minted US Navy submarine
                    lieutenant in WW2. The stories he had to tell about
                    the experience were bone-chilling.

                    He only served for 4 years, and spent the next 40
                    years making his fortune in private business. But to
                    his dying day, his identity was that of a Naval
                    officer first and foremost. It’s probably the
                    majority of the reason my father became career Navy.

                    It’s fascinating to me how life-defining experiences
                    like that can become.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465519>
              +
                dndnrsn says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 1:37 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465530>
                ~new~

                Nitpick: Red Army mortality was a bit higher than 25%
                when POWs who died in German captivity are counted.
                German military mortality, likewise, a tad over 25%.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465512>
      *
        Error says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:12 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465417>
        ~new~

        I tend to blame this on the transition of schools from being,
        well, whatever they used to be, into something like a cross
        between a daycare and a padded-room prison. The reason our
        adults seem like children is because they’ve never been allowed
        to be adults.

        Our social plan, at least within my lifetime, has been “keep the
        kids safe and out of the way until they’re ready to take care of
        themselves.” But the self-sufficiency function is not “N years
        of being alive”. It’s “N years of being forced to be
        self-sufficient.” You don’t let people out of the playpen when
        they’re ready; you let them out (or they break out), and then
        they /become/ ready.

        Everything we stick an age limit on has this character, which is
        why people just above the age limit for any given vice tend to
        be retarded about it. Raising the limits will not help with
        this, it will just keep people retarded for longer.

        [edit: Something I haven’t thought of before: Okay, take away
        the padded walls and you’ll get adults who actually know how to
        be adults, but you’ll also get the human wreckage of whatever
        slice of the population really need those padded walls. I think
        there might be a tradeoff here that has no good answer.]

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            Incurian says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:46 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465490>
            ~new~

            Treat people differently based on their needs, as individuals.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465417>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:43 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465624>
            ~new~

            We get the human wreckage right now; we just get it at
            whatever age where we choose to take away the walls. Nobody
            lives in a padded room forever (as much as some campus
            activists might want to).

            I think the bigger issue is that if we remove all the
            padding suddenly, we’ll get the simultaneous wreckage of
            every individual who /would have wrecked/ when they got out
            of the rubber room. (e.g. removing the drinking age is going
            to cause the sudden alcohol overdose of all of the 12 to 20
            year olds who /would have/ OD’d at age 21.) No politician
            would ever be willing to take the heat for that.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465417>
          o
            Gazeboist <https://gazeboist.com> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:43 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465745>
            ~new~

                Take away the padded walls and you’ll get adults who
                actually know how to be adults, but you’ll also get the
                human wreckage of whatever slice of the population
                really need those padded walls. I think there might be a
                tradeoff here that has no good answer.

            Steadily reduce the amount of padding? You have about ten
            years* to work with here, there’s no need to expect everyone
            to magically jump from preteen to young professional levels
            of maturity, although obviously some people can.

            * Ages 8-18 or so seem reasonable to me; figure five-ish
            years of general education followed by five-ish years of
            either apprenticeship or serious academics.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465417>
              +
                aldi says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 7:06 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466369>
                ~new~

                finland does this really well — driving isn’t legal
                until 18. But you start gradually scaling up from 15
                with high school driving education as part of the yearly
                curriculum. Finland has extremely safe roads, all things
                considered, and the legislative developments don’t seem
                to be enough to explain it: it is also cultural.

                More importantly, almost everyone needs to be able to
                drive in such a sparse country, so almost everyone
                shares the costs and benefits from economies of scale.

                Would be nice if alcohol, tobacco and firearms were
                treated similarly.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465745>
          o
            aldi says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 7:16 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466371>
            ~new~

            one thing that can make people grow up extremely fast is
            systematic child abuse. I don’t know of anything else that
            can make a child more attuned to the concerns and whims of
            adults (who, lets face it, are the bizarre creatures a human
            has to be able to negotiate with to be considered “adult”)
            as quick.

            There are battered ten year olds out there who can wash
            dishes, do tax returns, and peel vegetables like their life
            depends on it, because sometimes it does. And in the past
            perhaps this inadvertent strategy was worthwhile because
            nobody had the life expectancy for the downsides to be
            cripplingly significant, at least within a generation.

            There is so much more for an individual to know now, “common
            sense” is a fiction. People remained in their contexts,
            people had physical access to the few(er) experts they
            needed to negotiate life, social control was much tighter.

            I think we have yet to even begin to see the full returns on
            “coddling” or “spoiling” the youth of today.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465417>
              +
                FacelessCraven says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 8:08 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466391>
                ~new~

                @aldi – “one thing that can make people grow up
                extremely fast is systematic child abuse.”

                I’m strongly suspecting you’re using a non-standard
                definition of child abuse. In any case, while there are
                a great many nifty things about the modern world, it
                certainly isn’t obvious to me that it’s innately
                superior to all human existence prior to the 1960s. If
                Child abuse was in fact systemic, it doesn’t seem to
                have prevented people from creating prosperous, orderly
                civilizations full of happy people.

                “I don’t know of anything else that can make a child
                more attuned to the concerns and whims of adults as quick”

                Children have to be attuned to the concerns of adults;
                how else can civilizing them be accomplished? Whims less
                so, but adults being whimsical in the sense you imply
                here doesn’t seem like a good thing.

                “And in the past perhaps this inadvertent strategy was
                worthwhile because nobody had the life expectancy for
                the downsides to be cripplingly significant, at least
                within a generation.”

                Life expectancy is largely a function of infant
                mortality. People were living into their 70s and 80s in
                the Roman empire, which lasted for a thousand years.
                Ditto all the other great nations and empires, from the
                Brits in the 1800s to the Chinese in 2000 BC.

                “There is so much more for an individual to know now,
                “common sense” is a fiction.”

                Can you name some specific things? As I mentioned in the
                other thread, I didn’t get a “modern” education, and
                I’ve done just fine. Meanwhile, I’ve paid money for a
                college-level honors English class where a sizable
                percentage of the students didn’t know what a paragraph was.

                “I think we have yet to even begin to see the full
                returns on “coddling” or “spoiling” the youth of today.”

                …Do you spend a lot of time around the youth?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466371>
      *
        dndnrsn says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:59 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465500>
        ~new~

        I get that there’s some hyperbole here, but the whole “guys just
        out of high school fought the Nazis, so what’s wrong with kids
        today” thing is … historically a bit ignorant. The biggest
        difference is probably that people are on average less
        physically fit (less working on farms, less walking around, more
        calories, etc). The men who were drafted (1/5 of men who had
        been registered for the draft, 10 million, plus 6 million
        volunteers) mostly did not end up in combat positions, so the
        guys who actually saw combat were a minority of a minority.
        Among that minority of a minority, the infantry absorbed a
        disproportionate share of the casualties.

        Paul Fussell’s /Wartime/ and /The Boys’ Crusade/ – he was an
        infantry officer in the war, so presumably knew what he was
        talking about – paints a picture of young men who really did not
        want to die, led by officers barely older than them (he was 20
        when he landed in France). Statistics (which have, admittedly,
        been challenged) suggest that a lot of soldiers refused to fire
        at the enemy, closed their eyes when they were firing, etc.
        Combat troops generally wore out after a few months of combat
        operations.

        If you were to take all the 18-year-old men deemed medically
        fit, ran them through a bit of exercise and dieting, and then
        trained them to the standard of a WWII infantryman of whatever
        country, they would probably perform as well as their
        equivalents 70-odd years ago did. People are physically softer,
        and are probably more used to various creature comforts, but the
        whole “grampa fought the Nazis and now his kid needs a safe
        space” ignores that grampa was probably terrified much of the time.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:50 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465629>
            ~new~

            This is a really excellent point. It’s also worth noting
            that there was absolutely no shortage of men who flocked to
            sign up for the armed services after 9/11 (recruiting
            offices were overwhelmed), suggesting that we still do have
            plenty of people who are willing and able to make sacrifices
            when they see an existential threat on the horizon. (We can
            debate endlessly about whether the threat was /real/, but my
            point is just that it was real /to them/.)

            I tend to think that the main difference is that people live
            in an artificially-constructed bubble without
            self-sufficiency for much longer now than they did back
            then. It used to be that by age 17 or 18, you were out and
            working full time in a trade, and if you lived in a rural
            area, you’d essentially had a full time job with the family
            business for a few years before that. Now we keep a
            significant chunk of our population (certainly the
            upper-middle-class children that are always being pointed to
            when people complain about the infantilization of society)
            in artificial environments on someone else’s bankroll until
            they are 22 to 26 (depending on if they’re going to grad
            school). Real self-sufficiency is beginning 5-10 years later
            than it did as a result of increased schooling. And it’s not
            even close to an equivalent substitute.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465500>
          o
            Cliff says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:30 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465656>
            ~new~

            I think the point is that people today COULD fight the Nazis
            too, if we expected that of them or gave them that option
            instead of coddling them

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465500>
              +
                Synonym Seven says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 9:35 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465802>
                ~new~

                So are you advocating Robo-Hitler, or…?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465656>
      *
        JPNunez says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:57 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465754>
        ~new~

        Well back in the time of their grandparents, fighting nazis with
        guns was legal and the government even paid you to do so,
        providing you with weapons, transport and training for it.

        But afterwards there was a huge amount of legislation making
        difficult or even impossible to fight nazis legally, essentially
        subsidizing nazism. That’s why this generation needs safe space,
        cause the government took away their right to shoot nazis.

        If you deregulated nazi fighting our generation would quickly be
        shooting nazis in the face as their grandparents did.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
          o
            John Schilling says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:14 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465809>
            ~new~

                …because the government took away their right to shoot
                nazis.

            By taking away all the Nazis worth shooting at. Deregulate
            Nazi-shooting, and nothing changes because the tiny handful
            of postwar losers who adopt name either die or shift to a
            different name, the end.

            A stable society cannot in the long term depend on a safety
            valve of the form, “These people are tough, mean, capable
            hombres but you are allowed to prove your manhood / satiate
            your bloodlust by fighting them”, because you will
            eventually either run out of people willing to play that
            role or run into ones too tough and capable for your young
            men to handle.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465754>
      *
        MostlyCredibleHulk says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 8:41 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465793>
        ~new~

        College is now used as a proxy for “can hold a job and perform
        as instructed, and has minimal knowledge that is required of
        average member of society”. Why one has to spend 3 years in a
        classroom and spend insane sums of money to achieve that is a
        big question, and I suspect mostly because all other proxies has
        been killed off by various political reasons. There are
        ridiculous requirements from many professions in US, not only
        college requirements but professional licensing requirements.
        I’ve spent 35 years of my life not knowing a person cutting my
        hair needs professional license – until I came to the US.
        Billions of people still have their hairs cut by woefully
        unlicensed barbers – and their haircuts are undistinguishable
        from ones done by venerable licensed professionals in the US.
        But somebody has to pay these costs, somebody has to pay for all
        that cottage industry that teaches, examines, checks compliance,
        etc. – the industry that produces absolutely no value except for
        itself. I think if we sum up all such industries, and add a lot
        of money spent teaching Shakespeare and Catullus’ poetry to
        people who then proceed to use resulting diploma to achieve
        employment as sports reporters and marketing associates, we’ll
        find a lot of missing value. Not that I am against learning
        Shakespeare and Catullus’ poetry – but it shouldn’t be required
        for being employed as a marketing associate.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465202>
25.
    Michael Cohen says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:21 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465208>
    ~new~

        First, can we dismiss all of this as an illusion? Maybe
        adjusting for inflation is harder than I think. Inflation is an
        average, so some things have to have higher-than-average
        inflation; maybe it’s education, health care, etc. Or maybe my
        sources have the wrong statistics.

        But I don’t think this is true. The last time I talked about
        this problem, someone mentioned they’re running a private school
        which does just as well as public schools but costs only
        $3000/student/year, a fourth of the usual rate. Marginal
        Revolution notes that India has a private health system that
        delivers the same quality of care as its public system for a
        quarter of the cost. Whenever the same drug is provided by the
        official US health system and some kind of grey market
        supplement sort of thing, the grey market supplement costs
        between a fifth and a tenth as much; for example, Google’s first
        hit for Deplin®, official prescription L-methylfolate, costs
        $175 for a month’s supply; unregulated L-methylfolate supplement
        delivers the same dose for about $30. And this isn’t even
        mentioning things like the $1 bag of saline that costs $700 at
        hospitals. Since it seems like it’s not too hard to do things
        for a fraction of what we currently do things for, probably we
        should be less reluctant to believe that the cost of everything
        is really inflated.

    The consumer price index aggregates the cost of food, clothing,
    transportation, recreation, “other goods and services” and the
    sectors described here. If the cost of food and clothing grew much
    more slowly than the cost of other things, it would look like a
    bunch of sectors’ prices were spiking with respect to “inflation”,
    i.e. with respect to an average of that sector and other sectors,
    where the other sectors’ prices weren’t growing as fast. Can all of
    this be explained by enormous efficiency gains in agriculture and
    textile manufacture?

    The paragraph refuting this idea seems inadequate.

    1) Private school doing just as well. There are a lot of possible
    explanations for this. My best guess is a) that they don’t accept
    students midyear as much as public schools, and they don’t face the
    same sorts of consequences that public school administrators do when
    they expel a student. Keeping out or kicking out students who are
    hard to teach is a fantastic way to improve educational outcomes. A
    couple other possibilities: b) the person who described this is
    twisting the facts in a major way; maybe they’re great grant writers
    with connections to donors, and some of the donated
    time/money/infrastructure/land are not accounted for. c) the school
    is not an accurate demographic sample of the United States as a whole.

    2) Indian health care. Of course it’s a quarter the cost! Comparing
    the prices of things in the US and India doesn’t seem to say much
    besides the fact that wages are lower there.

    3) Grey market cheaper. This doesn’t factor in the cost of doing the
    research to discover the drug.

    4) Saline at the hospital. To cover the cost of caring for the meth
    addict you described. Don’t hospitals overcharge for some things and
    undercharge for others? I don’t think looking at the most egregious
    case of a mispriced service suggests that hospitals could be run
    much more cheaply (maybe they could, but I don’t think this selected
    example suggests it). I think this example only suggests that
    hospitals could be pricing services more in accordance their costs.

    Basically, I think the examples provided for “we could be doing this
    cheaper” don’t amount to much, but the brief nod to the possibility
    that different industries’ prices inflate at different rates seems
    quite plausible to me, particularly given enormous efficiency gains
    in agriculture and textile manufacture. Agriculture and textiles
    have capitalized on the gains from outsourcing much more effectively
    than education, health, and housing. If those sectors had been the
    ones to capture the efficiency gains from outsourcing, we’d be
    racking our brains desperately about why the cost of food had
    inexplicably risen dramatically with respect to “inflation.”

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Scott Alexander says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:41 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465219>
        ~new~

        Re 2: Indian private health care is one-quarter the cost of
        Indian public health care, not of American health care.

        Re 3: The drugs are generic in both countries. The drug no
        longer has IP protection in the US and is being sold by people
        other than the people who discovered it.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465208>
          o
            Michael Cohen says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:38 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465238>
            ~new~

            Got it. I should have assumed you would never make the
            mistake I was supposing you had re: 2. Sorry.

            Re 2) So then we need something to explain how Indian public
            health care is so cost inefficient. Given that explanation,
            whatever it is, I don’t see how it could be the explanation
            for the broader issue, given that the US doesn’t have the
            same cost disparity between private and public hospitals.

            Re 3) I don’t have much of an answer to this one. But
            suppose for a second it had been food in which the prices
            for that sector grew relative to the other sectors. How easy
            would it be to find two food products of demonstrably
            similar quality while one is many times the price of the
            other? I guess this is a question of
            blogger-degrees-of-freedom, similar to the piece about
            cardiologists you just wrote. But I might be willing to bite
            the bullet on this one.

            Even biting the bullet on 3), the fact that some sectors
            have made efficiency gains from outsourcing labor seems like
            enough to explain why the remaining sectors have relative
            efficiency losses compared to the average of them all.

            At least, that seems to be enough to explain education and
            housing. The fact that the US spends so much more on health
            care than other first world countries would suggest there
            are gains to be made in the US, and as you mentioned above,
            there are similar ones to be made in India. But that seems
            to be a problem of much smaller scope than having having
            multiple industries across the world seeing inexplicable
            efficiency losses.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465219>
              +
                Fossegrimen says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 3:56 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465242>
                ~new~

                2) doesn’t just need to explain why it’s cheaper in
                India, but why it’s cheaper in Switzerland where a Big
                Mac is $7 and takes 10 mins to earn….

                /Everything/ is more expensive in Switzerland except
                education and healthcare which is massively cheaper.
                This is an anomaly and if we can figure out this one and
                fix it, I suspect most other costs would adjust accordingly.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465238>
      *
        sohois says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:09 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465279>
        ~new~

        Even assuming that this is true, and these industries are simply
        experienced normal inflation based cost rises that are higher
        than any other industry, there is still the question of what
        exactly is causing such high rises? Whether we call it cost
        disease or inflation, one should still wonder what drives it
        year after year?

        Wages would normally be considered one of the major drivers of
        inflation in most industries, but of course it was demonstrated
        that this hasn’t seemed to occur.

        Raw material costs? But again, if this was the case we would
        also observe much greater inflation in primary and secondary
        industries, but we don’t. The costs of the basics, whether raw
        materials or electricity or water, have not rocketed up.

        There are probably industries which have not taken advantage of
        outsourcing or other efficiency gains, yet which have not seen
        inflation to match with these industries. There should be more
        to it.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465208>
      *
        stucchio says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:16 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465513>
        ~new~

        Indian health care is cheap relative to middle class wages.

        Here’s an anecdote. I had spine surgery at one of the best
        hospitals in Pune for 1.4 lac rupees – about $2000 – and I’m
        told I could have spent half that if I shopped around. This is
        1-3 months wage for a software engineer or other professional.
        In the US, a similar surgery might cost $100-200k – approx 0.5-2
        years wages for a software engineer or similar professional.

        To make a similar comparison, a month’s rent in Bandra or Colaba
        (posh neighborhoods of Bombay) is in the same ballpark as major
        surgery. Can you get surgery in NYC for approximately 1-2 months
        of rent in the Upper West? I doubt it.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465208>
      *
        Wrong Species says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:42 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465535>
        ~new~

        You could use the GDP deflator, which doesn’t favor any
        industry, and compare that to the cost of these things. Still
        though, the deflator is itself affected by the cost of these
        things so I’m not sure how much more useful it is.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465208>
26.
    Sniffnoy says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:28 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465211>
    ~new~

    The second “discuss this phenomenon” link seems to be missing an
    initial “http://”.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
27.
    glorkvorn says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:28 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465212>
    ~new~

    Love this post! It really ties together a lot of loose thoughts that
    have been bouncing around in my head about the economy of the modern
    world. Everything costs more, and it’s not just simple inflation,
    but no one’s making more money- so /where is the money going/?

    I’ll take a stab at one small piece of it- the pension crisis.
    Public Pensions have very strict risk tolerance rules (no one wants
    their pension fund to go broke in a market crash!) so they tend to
    invest heavily in high-quality bonds. Notably, the US Social
    Security Trust Fund is entirely invested in treasury bonds and US
    securities. But with interest rates being so low these days, the
    yield from bonds just isn’t enough, so they require a larger and
    larger nominal value to fund the same yearly pension. It’s sort of
    the same as how 1st world governments have been able to run up
    ridiculously large nominal values of national debt, but the interest
    payments are still manageable. If we had 80’s level interest rates,
    this level of national debt would be disastrous, but public pensions
    could also get by with a much lower amount of bonds.

    My guess is that it ultimately reflects the slowing of productivity
    growth in our society. There are no groundbreaking leaps in
    productivity coming down the pipeline, and the magic of finance has
    factored that into today’s prices by making us pay much more in the
    present for a secure retirement than we would if we could expect the
    future to be significantly more prosperous.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
28.
    drethelin says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:30 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465214>
    ~new~

    A huge proportion of this seems to me to be rent-seeking and
    monopoly power. People will charge as much money as their customers
    are willing to pay, and what people are willing to pay depends on
    how much money they have and what the alternatives are. Right now,
    there are no practical cheap alternatives to the classic model of
    hospital stay health procedures (there are in some markets, which is
    probably why plastic surgeries and lasik go down in price where
    other healthcare doesn’t). This means that hospitals are free to
    charge enormous amounts of money to anyone who has it (rich people
    and insurance companies), and let the poorer rot. They are in fact
    incentivized NOT to provide a cheaper option, because if they did it
    would cut into their own profits. If the hospitals/doctors didn’t
    have a legal monopoly on medical treatment (and the medical schools
    an oligopoly on the supply of doctors), there would be room for both
    luxury medical treatment and more normal service. Of course, this is
    exacerbated by the fact that medical schools artificially limit the
    number of doctors, and that the law sharply limits who can and
    cannot provide all sorts of medical services based on arguably
    outdated criteria.

    Similarly: Top universities have a monopoly (or at least oligopoly)
    on that form of prestige, and so charge exactly as much as they can
    wring from students, which is enormously increased by the fact that,
    via student loans, they’re charging the government, a famously
    price-insensitive purchaser.

    Buyers who are willing to pay whatever is asked are another factor
    here: In college, public transit construction, military spending,
    and many kinds of healthcare, the people buying it are not looking
    to save money. They’re looking to achieve a specific goal, whatever
    the cost. This provides untold opportunities for prices to balloon.

    I feel like there’s more to say on this topic but I’m kinda falling
    asleep so I apologize if this is incoherent.

    PS: With regard to housing, it’s not exactly a spooky mystery as to
    why prices have skyrocketed in certain areas. It’s literally illegal
    to building housing at a high enough density to make it cheap in a
    lot of jurisdictions. In other areas, it’s not illegal, but it is
    rendered unprofitable by various regulations and laws which usually
    have a barely-concealed NIMBY motive.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
29.
    ScottB says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:30 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465215>
    ~new~

    I don’t think there’s a huge mystery here, we already know
    intuitively which of these industries are affected. When you run
    into an expense, you don’t need an estimate to know whether it will
    be fast and cheap, or an enormous, expensive hassle. And the
    expensive industries all tend to have one thing in common: licensing
    schemes.

    State-issued licenses have absolutely exploded over recent years,
    and they restrict labor supply in loads of fields. Law, medicine,
    teaching, engineering and architecture… these are the areas where
    lay people are stuck racking up hour after hour of labor and paying
    out the nose for them. And it’s a big change from 30-50 years ago.

    (In fields with little regulated licensing, credentials and degrees
    can still have this effect).

    Get rid of licenses for most professions and allow people to rise
    and fall based on their reputations and achievements. This will do
    more than anything else to end cost disease.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Brandon Berg says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:16 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465267>
        ~new~

        If the issue were licensing, this would show up in the form of
        increased salaries. As you can see in the OP, this does not
        plausibly account for more than a small portion of the cost
        increase.

        Certainly licensing is part of the reason why doctors are paid
        so well, but they’ve been licensed and well-paid for a long
        time; this doesn’t explain the recent cost increases.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465215>
          o
            Marklouis says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:03 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465463>
            ~new~

            Not necessarily…it could (does?) result in more headcount
            than higher salaries. Total industry wages would be the
            right metric. When i was in high school, the administrative
            staff was very small…i’m guessing it looks different now.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465267>
              +
                Brandon Berg says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 2:24 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465561>
                ~new~

                I made exactly this point upthread in response to a
                different comment, and I think increasing headcount is
                definitely part of the story, but it’s not consistent
                with a story about pricing rising due to stricter
                licensing requirements driving down supply. If the
                supply of doctors decreases, you can’t increase
                headcount without paying them more.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465463>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 2:32 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465568>
                    ~new~

                    But you can increase the headcount of nurses, nurse
                    practitioners, x-ray techs, secretaries, etc.

                    This is definitely going on in education. Headcount
                    at public schools rises dramatically, but class
                    sizes stay the same (or increase) because all the
                    new people being hired are administrators or
                    specialists rather than regular full time “in the
                    classroom” teachers…

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465561>
30.
    Jugemu says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:32 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465216>
    ~new~

    Perhaps the things that are getting more expensive and not improving
    are getting more expensive /because /they are not improving.

    If you want to be the hippest phone-user on the block, you only need
    the latest iPhone. A new one will come out in a year anyway, before
    most of the plebs have had a chance to catch up, so you don’t need
    some sort of super-duper iPhone. Same goes for TVs – the rich can
    buy the latest 4D curved Uber-HD TV, and by the time the price falls
    enough for Joe Average to have one too, they can just move on to
    holograms or whatever. On the other hand, if the plebs’
    education/health-care/etc is about as good as yours in objective
    terms, with no major improvements on the horizon, you need /some
    /way to signal that you’re rich and high status, which results in a
    zero-sum battle to get into the most prestigious
    university/hospital/etc.

    This doesn’t explain the subway bit. I suspect over-regulation (and
    regulatory capture) and increased risk-aversion do play a role as well.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Jugemu says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:01 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465243>
        ~new~

        An addendum to this is that I’ve started to see more stuff about
        golden or jewel-encrusted phones in the last couple of years,
        just as the rate of improvement in the technology has started to
        slow down. If this becomes a trend among the rich, Joe Average
        will feel some need to keep up lest he become Joe Below-Average,
        so he’ll at least spend more to get a fancier case (etc) and the
        amount spent on phones will start increasing even as they stop
        getting much better.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465216>
      *
        The original Mr. X says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:22 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465284>
        ~new~

            On the other hand, if the plebs’ education/health-care/etc
            is about as good as yours in objective terms, with no major
            improvements on the horizon, you need some way to signal
            that you’re rich and high status, which results in a
            zero-sum battle to get into the most prestigious
            university/hospital/etc.

        I could see this working with education, but do people really
        signal all that much over healthcare?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465216>
          o
            Jugemu says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 7:52 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465304>
            ~new~

            It doesn’t seem so obvious to me either, but Robin Hanson
            has claimed as much in the past, and people do at least talk
            about their medical problems a lot if you give them half a
            chance. Perhaps also, being in a fancy hospital (which
            therefore costs more) /feels/ higher status even if there’s
            no one there to see you (and usually you’ll have visitors too).

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465284>
          o
            Deiseach says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:55 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465712>
            ~new~

            /do people really signal all that much over healthcare?/

            Apparently people used to have their appendices removed,
            even if healthy, because it was all the rage
            <http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/854296>
            to have this new operation. From a periodical of 1903:

                Sometime ago THE JOURNAL prophesied a probable greater
                extension of the disease of appendicitis in British high
                life through the example set by the king. This prophecy
                is reported by the daily press as having been fulfilled.
                Appendicitis is increasing, it is said, in Great Britain
                by leaps and bounds so that operations for this disease
                are becoming more and more common. The Countess of
                Dudley, one of England’s noted beauties, is one of the
                latest who has gone through the operation, and if we had
                recourse to all the records perhaps we would find, as is
                said by newspaper writers, that aristocratic appendices
                are being amputated at very short intervals. What will
                be the outcome and how long the epidemic will last is
                beyond knowledge, and we have stopped foretelling.

            Humans are strange creatures.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465284>
31.
    dawso007 <http://real-psychiatry.blogspot.com/> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:39 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465218>
    ~new~

    The starting point is government regulation, but government
    regulation that favors business. I first noticed it when I was an
    undergrad back in the days when credit reporting was a top secret
    operation. Eventually it was promoted in Congress and there was a
    proliferation of these businesses. The main argument was that better
    access to credit would grease the skids of capitalism. Politicians
    and their business partners never consider the cost of bankruptcy
    due to credit promotion, fees for credit reports, and innovations
    like extra charges based on your credit score. They certainly did
    not take into account identity theft as a massive cottage industry
    that was essentially unpoliced for decades or the continued cost of
    politicians facilitating all of that by making Social Security
    Numbers national identifiers for the credit industry. There is no
    better model of the government and their business partners inventing
    a multi-billion dollar industry that essentially adds little to no
    value to the average citizen. In terms of financial services, I
    would also add the 401K/403B programs that are currently being
    reassessed as retirement vehicles that probably have little value to
    most holders, but major value to the financial service companies
    collecting fees for decades irrespective of mediocre financial
    performance. Another government invented business to benefit the few.

    In healthcare, the model is no different. Outrageous costs
    <http://real-psychiatry.blogspot.com/2017/01/americans-cant-do-basic-health-care.html>
    compared with other countries essentially for a bloated, high cost,
    low value to no value management structure. That same management
    structure rations healthcare by government mandate in order to make
    corporate profits at every level. It is a unique business model that
    can ration goods and services, provide an inferior product, and do
    it with abundant hype from the government. PBMs, EHRs, MCOs, and Big
    Pharma are all essentially set up to extract top dollar from the
    American people.

    Prices have nowhere to go but sky high when your economy operates on
    a model where the government can invent businesses, set them up to
    get as much revenue from a population held captive by threat of
    financial ruin, and have them run by managers who have no idea what
    it is like to compete on price and quality. There is no incentive to
    provide a quality product when you have a guaranteed income stream.

    In healthcare these days – all the managers have to do is advertise
    quality. The average citizen should be seeing more “Top Hospitals”
    than really exist out there.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
32.
    Virbie says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:07 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465223>
    ~new~

    > Once again, nobody seems to have been offered the choice between
    expensive hospitals with private rooms versus cheap hospitals with
    roommates.

    You touch on this point a few times throughout the article, and it
    definitely resonates with me: I recently spent some time
    backpacking, and my time in India reflected this in spades. I’ve
    been to India probably a dozen times to visit family, but this was
    the first time I heard (and experienced) the phrase “sab kuch
    milega”, from other backpackers. It loosely translates to
    “everything is possible”. It’s an oddly rationalist feature of
    Indian culture: people are willing to be pragmatic in a “both of us
    are better off so this makes sense” kind of way that the US has a
    bunch of weird taboos and norms around.

    As one example, I showed up at 3 AM at a hotel after getting off an
    overnight bus, and they didn’t have any formally free rooms until
    check-in time (around 10 AM). What they did have was a room where
    the residents had paid for the night and left at an odd time, around
    1 AM. In any American or European hotel I’ve been to, they would
    steadfastly refuse to let me sleep in a room that was technically
    not available until housekeeping had made it look like no one had
    ever been there, as you find in every hotel. It smelled a little
    like cigarettes, they gave me a clean extra blanket, and I slept on
    the couch, but it was way way better than my deliriously
    sleep-deprived self camping out in the lobby chair for seven hours
    (or walking around an unfamiliar Indian city in the middle of the
    night). I know this is a weird example, but it seems like a
    fundamentally irrational facet of American culture that businesses
    are so unyielding at offering anything but 100% service at 100% price.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Bugmaster says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:28 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465232>
        ~new~

        I think this might be a symptom of market consolidation (though
        I could be wrong). If you are running a small hotel all by
        yourself, you can take some risks. Maybe you let this guy sleep
        in an unkepmt room and it all works out; or maybe he gets angry
        about the cigarette smoke and decides to sue you; but it’s your
        own choice to make in the end. On the other hand, you need to
        grab absolutely every bit of money that comes your way in order
        to survive, so you’re incentivized to risk a little.

        But if you’re managing hotel #1,234,567 of some mega-chain, you
        can’t afford to take any risks at all. Your mega-corp is a nice
        juicy target for lawsuits, while the marginal benefit of
        acquiring one more customer (and at a discount price, too) is
        basically epsilon. On top of that, you are not accountable to
        yourself, but to the corporate office of HotelCo, Inc. — a
        corporation so large that the only way they can manage their
        business is to set specific metrics and rigidly adhere to them.
        If you screw up even a little, you will instantly lose your job,
        so the risk just isn’t worth it.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465223>
          o
            Sniffnoy says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:38 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465237>
            ~new~

            Note that this falls under Scott’s 6th suggestion —
            insitutionalization leading to effective lower risk
            tolerance, due to institutions having lower risk tolerance
            than individuals.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465232>
              +
                Bugmaster says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:28 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465286>
                ~new~

                Yes exactly; but, on top of low risk tolerance, you have
                a very high incentive for total standardization.
                Firstly, because the only way you can manage your
                massive business empire is to make every franchise the
                same; secondly, because your customers actually expect
                the same exact service at every location. That’s one of
                your primary market advantages, in fact (other than
                economies of scale, which, once again, require total
                standardization).

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465237>
                  #
                    eyeballfrog says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 12:42 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465487>
                    ~new~

                    This sounds weird to me. Intuitively, I would think
                    that a large institution has less relative risk than
                    an individual due to its size, and thus should be
                    more risk tolerant. What mechanism cancels this
                    effect out?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465286>
                  #
                    Garrett says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:25 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465651>
                    ~new~

                    A large institution may have less relative risk, but
                    greater absolute risk.

                    If you sue a single hotel for a significant amount
                    of money, you’re likely to end up owning a hotel,
                    and you don’t want a hotel. So you’re mostly limited
                    to whatever the cash value of cash-on-hand plus
                    second-mortgage value of the property plus insurance
                    value is. So the max take-home from a lawsuit, minus
                    legal fees is going to be less. Plus any jury is
                    going to look at a mom-and-pop business with a lot
                    more sympathy than a mega-corp.

                    If you sue a hotel chain, they have a huge cash flow
                    that can be tapped or garnished. Their lawyers make
                    it harder to win. But winning means you go home with
                    a big pile of cash rather than a small pile of cash
                    and a title to a hotel. This makes it more appealing
                    to sue for both lawyers and plaintiffs.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465286>
          o
            Deiseach says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:04 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465361>
            ~new~

            Yeah – you let Random Guy have the room for a few hours
            instead of cleaning it out and then the next day he refuses
            to pay because it’s wasn’t a “proper” booking or he couldn’t
            use the bed because the sheets were dirty or whatever. A
            small business can absorb that and decide the next time
            they’re not going to be so obliging; working for a large
            chain, you will be /eaten/ for not following procedure and
            maybe even fired.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465232>
              +
                drethelin says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 2:38 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465571>
                ~new~

                Hotels charge in advance.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465361>
                  #
                    Deiseach says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 5:45 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465707>
                    ~new~

                    I take your correction 🙂

                    My point was more that an owner-operator has more
                    freedom to take risks than someone working for an
                    organisation that sets one set of standards for all
                    its units nationally or globally.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465571>
33.
    Bugmaster says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:20 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465229>
    ~new~

    Could it be that the costs are increasing because technology enables
    us — and, in some cases, requires us — to obtain more valuable goods
    and services ?

    For example, back in ye olde days, cancer was a death sentence. If
    you got cancer, you simply died, and the only costs you would incur
    at that point would be the cost of your funeral. Today, we have
    medicines that can mitigate at least some of the cancers (and, in
    rare cases, eliminate them entirely). These medicines are expensive,
    and, since about 15-20% of people will get cancer at some point,
    they may have a non-trivial effect on the total cost of health care.
    But it gets even worse, because medical R&D costs rise exponentially
    as all of the easy problems are solved one by one, leaving only the
    very difficult ones.

    The same might be true of education. In ye olde days, an average
    child only had to learn readin’, ritin’, and ‘rithmetic in order to
    become a fully contributing member of society — or, perhaps, in
    order to enter a profession that won’t damn him to lifelong poverty.
    Today, that same child needs to learn things like algebra (or even
    calculus), a foreign language (preferably more than one), basic
    computer skills (or even computer programming), physics, and so on.
    To make matters worse, society has become a lot more complex, and
    there are many other mandatory activities that demand the child’s
    time (unless he wants to become a recluse, I suppose). Education has
    become a lot more difficult.

    This might even apply to basic living necessities. In the old days,
    “food and shelter” translated to “porridge and a wooden hut”. Today,
    it means “a balanced diet and air conditioning”. And our society
    practically requires access to things our ancestors could not even
    dream of, such as cellphones, mass transportation, and vaccinations.
    As our quality of life rises, so does the cost.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Incurian says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:57 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465499>
        ~new~

        This sounds reasonable, but also sounds like it wouldn’t account
        for the enormously high rate at which costs are increasing, and
        the fact that they aren’t increasing as quickly outside the
        United States.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465229>
      *
        Wrong Species says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:48 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465536>
        ~new~

        I don’t think education is any more functional than it used to
        be. Most people don’t used advanced math. Foreign language
        classes are practically useless and more classes are crammed in
        that students end up forgetting anyways.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465229>
          o
            AnonEEmous says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:04 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465636>
            ~new~

            i think what he’s missed is that most of the things he
            listed are not necessary, merely treated as though they were

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465536>
              +
                Bugmaster says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 7:19 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465766>
                ~new~

                What’s the difference ?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465636>
34.
    andrewswift says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:28 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465233>
    ~new~

    What you observe is *fifty years of optimization of wealth extraction*.

    Price outcomes depend on the contributions of hundreds of participants.

    Every participant optimizes his/her earnings, exerting a *constant
    upward pressure on price*.

    Participants become ever more expert at getting rich.
    Wealth-extraction schemes (scams) are refined and optimized (in all
    markets), and price increases are pushed downstream /(in markets
    where buyers can’t push back)/.

    *Radical price increases reflect markets where consumers have
    reduced ability to push back:*

    – complex markets/(can’t understand)/
    – opaque markets/(can’t see)/
    – entrenched/highly-regulated markets/(can’t modify)/
    – necessary-to-keep-living markets/(can’t avoid)/
    – limited-quantity markets/(really want)/
    – intermediated markets where the end buyer doesn’t decide how
    things are purchased/(don’t choose)/

    Some systems are resistant to contributors’ efforts to extract
    wealth and some systems are not. *There’s an equilibrium between
    cost and readiness to pay.*

    To reduce the costs in expensive domains, willingness to pay the
    high costs has to be reduced. *As long as the buyer won’t or can’t
    say no, costs will increase through the entire production process.*

    There won’t necessarily be one big obvious rip-off, but every
    participant will optimize the heck out of his contribution and the
    overall pressure will push costs up.

    *Could one provide a cheaper alternative in these domains?* Sure for
    a little while, but if the bottom line is that people are willing to
    pay more for the service *the prices will creep back up*.

    The only exception would be where the new, lower-priced, alternative
    sets a new standard and *buyers refuse to continue paying the old
    prices*. See
    |https://stratechery.com/2016/dollar-shave-club-and-the-disruption-of-everything/|
    for a great article about this.

    This is getting too long, but it reminds of a thought I often have.
    People imagined (as you mention) that all the increases in
    productivity would result in a reduced work time.

    But, this idea didn’t take into account the balance of power.

    *Increased efficiency just increased benefits for owners. A worker
    is just a cog; increasing efficiency puts ever more pressure on the
    cog.*

    As with cost-disease, *if the cogs aren’t in a position to say no,
    the pressure to optimize them will just continue unabated.*

    I may have just convinced myself of the value of a universal basic
    income.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:41 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465258>
        ~new~

        This is an absolutely spectacular summary of how and when
        markets fail. Bookmarking this to point people to later when
        they complain about how the market obviously will/won’t work for
        case X.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
          o
            baconbacon says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:05 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465590>
            ~new~

                necessary-to-keep-living markets (can’t avoid)

            Well I guess food prices are about to go through the roof!

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465258>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 4:38 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465664>
                ~new~

                They do when there’s a constraint on supply, because
                demand has severe constraints on its elasticity, unlike
                luxury goods.

                I didn’t take his list to be, “here are factors that
                will instantly halt a market”, but rather, “these are
                factors that will upset basic supply and demand
                equilibrium and distort markets.”

                The standard Econ 101 concept of a market assumes that
                both participants in a transaction have the option to
                decline and seek other bargaining partners. Cases where
                that isn’t possible for whatever reason (government
                regulation, private monopoly, externally-imposed time
                constraints) are necessarily market-distorting.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465590>
      *
        Mark says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:14 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465281>
        ~new~

        Lovely.

        Individual choice can’t be the sole preserve of the consumer.
        Workers have to be able to say “this work is stupid or horrible”
        as a mechanism to (a) improve conditions (b) stop pointless work.

        We want the power to say “no”.
        No, I don’t want to buy that. No, that idea isn’t “exciting”.
        No, I’m not going to that meeting. No, no, no, no, no.

        (Actually, thinking about it, some of us already have this
        power. I exercise it daily. I think more people should do the
        same. Just say “no”. (I get great pleasure from walking around a
        shopping centre thinking about all of the things I’m not going
        to buy.))

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
      *
        Douglas Knight says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:18 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465423>
        ~new~

        That is a very abstract comment, so it is very hard to pin down
        what you are saying. You could apply it in many different ways
        to a single example, to produce many contrary claims.

        But the most concrete points you make are all wrong in these
        examples. Most of Scott’s examples are non-profit, so what do
        you even mean by the owners? In the for-profit examples, the
        owners did not do very well. You say that one could produce a
        low-cost version, but the willingness to pay more would push the
        price up. But that is confusing price and cost. The owners would
        love to sell a low-cost version at list price and pocket the
        difference. But they don’t. Much of the cost is going to pay
        more people, and to pay them less. That is not efficiency.

        (By these examples I mean education and medicine. Housing is
        pretty different, so that even your concrete statements do not
        seem specific enough to evaluate.)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
          o
            andrewswift says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:25 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465650>
            ~new~

            Thanks for your answer. I will try to find time to respond
            because I think your criticisms are valid but it will be a
            few days.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465423>
          o
            Douglas Knight says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:35 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465704>
            ~new~

            One scenario along these line is that people are tempted by,
            say, price discrimination and build big organizations to do
            it, but they aren’t actually profitable and just pay for the
            apparatus of price discrimination. Hospitals and insurance
            companies do have big departments whose job it is to battle
            each other, accomplishing nothing in net. Colleges are very
            good at price discrimination, but then what can they do with
            all the money? They are forced to spend it, and perhaps have
            no better idea than amenities.

            But medicine is organized very differently in America,
            Britain, and France. And yet all three have seen medical
            spending grow at about the same high speed. American
            spending has been double for decades. If these factors were
            important, why wouldn’t we see divergence between Britain
            and France? Why not further divergence of America?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465423>
      *
        Incurian says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:00 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465501>
        ~new~

        From your analysis, it sounds [intuitively] like easily
        available credit would be a[the?] major driver of cost increases.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
      *
        cassander says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:07 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465593>
        ~new~

        >Increased efficiency just increased benefits for owners. A
        worker is just a cog; increasing efficiency puts ever more
        pressure on the cog.

        This is just recycled marxist progressive emiseration. It was
        wrong 150 years ago, and it’s still wrong today.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
          o
            wysinwygymmv says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:28 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465609>
            ~new~

            What’s the argument against it?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465593>
              +
                cassander says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 4:10 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465642>
                ~new~

                it’s demonstrably, empirically false, for one. the claim
                is that the poorer are getting poorer absolutely. they
                clearly are not when you use even remotely objective
                measures. It also assumes that the workers have zero
                bargaining power because they don’t own the means of
                production. Putting aside the fact that they can always
                use part of their wages to buy said means, what is the
                means of production to a software engineer or sales rep?
                The most valuable sort of capital in the world is not
                physical capital, but human. machines are much less
                valuable than people who know how to design, build,
                maintain, or operate machines. And human capital is, by
                definition, owned by the workers.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465609>
                  #
                    andrewswift says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:29 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465654>
                    ~new~

                    I will try to write more later, but I didn’t mean to
                    imply that all workers are cogs. I meant that to the
                    extent that you can’t say no to a job, you’re a cog.
                    Software engineers have much more flexibility in
                    their employment than burger-flippers do.

                    I meant to draw a parallel between looking for a job
                    and shopping for health care (for example).

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465642>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 4:43 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465669>
                    ~new~

                    >I will try to write more later, but I didn’t mean
                    to imply that all workers are cogs. I meant that to
                    the extent that you can’t say no to a job, you’re a
                    cog. Software engineers have much more flexibility
                    in their employment than burger-flippers do.

                    Everyone has options though. Your assertion implies
                    an effective conspiracy by all employers against
                    employees. And more than that, just having an
                    employee who’s been around for a while is hugely
                    valuable because they’ve picked up lots of highly
                    specific knowledge. I’m currently involved in
                    replacing two people I used to work with who left
                    for better options, and while the replacements will
                    have similar credentials, it will be 6 months at
                    least before they’re producing at the same level.
                    Paying them more to stay would have been a good
                    bargain for the company just because of the cost of
                    training replacements.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465642>
      *
        AnonEEmous says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:05 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465638>
        ~new~

        What you observe is fifty years of optimization of wealth
        extraction.

        but why in only one capitalist country, out of all of them

        ???

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
          o
            andrewswift says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 4:36 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465663>
            ~new~

            It /is/ true in all countries, but it just /looks/ different
            because the markets are different and willingness or ability
            to pay varies. I don’t have time to answer fully right now,
            but even in a place like India, the cheaper health care is
            just a result of the fact that people will do without rather
            than pay higher prices. Americans are willing to pay more,
            that’s all.

            I live in France and although health-care costs are lower
            than in the US, they’re maxed out here too. Every bit of the
            system is extracting every last bit of possible profit. But,
            the constraints are different at every level than in the US:
            in terms of the legal framework, the tax system, the media
            etc. So, the millions of factors that make up health care
            rates give a different result.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465638>
              +
                AnonEEmous says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 7:11 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465760>
                ~new~

                but why are Americans uniquely willing to pay more?
                doesn’t it sound like maybe there’s something else going
                on here? because your explanation is very close to just
                special pleading really

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465663>
                  #
                    Nornagest says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 7:13 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465762>
                    ~new~

                    Well, we’re richer. But we’re not 4-10x richer.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465760>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 7:56 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465779>
                    ~new~

                    No, we’re quite a bit more than 10x richer.

                    2015 GNI per capita (Atlas smoothed)
                    <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD>
                    in USD for India was $1,600. For the US, it was $55,980.

                    Remember, in the West, the Indians we interact with
                    are a very non-representative sample of the upper
                    middle class. Don’t forget how many people live in
                    abject poverty in the country!

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465760>
                  #
                    Nornagest says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 8:07 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465783>
                    ~new~

                    Than Europe or South Korea, I mean. We are indeed
                    more than 4-10x richer than India.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465760>
      *
        CecilTheLion says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 1:54 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466152>
        ~new~

        In Canada, people are living on higher and higher levels of
        debt. In regards to mortgages, more and more people are
        over-leveraging themselves (taking on debt something like 500%
        of annual income); this says to me that no one has the ability
        to say no. They’re demanding a certain quality of life, and they
        won’t be denied. They’ll pay any cost. 🙁

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465233>
35.
    tcheasdfjkl says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:29 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465234>
    ~new~

    Could we have shortages of a lot of things? This came to mind when
    you mentioned housing, since the only topic in your post that I’m
    familiar with is housing politics in the Bay Area, and here the
    problem is absolutely that there’s not nearly enough housing because
    zoning laws are super restrictive, and even within the allowed
    limits the political process provides a lot of opportunity for
    NIMBYs to obstruct development. So the supply of housing has been
    barely increasing while the population has been increasing a lot, so
    housing is absurdly expensive.

    The story you tell about hospitals quickly kicking people out
    postpartum makes me wonder if the supply of hospitals has been
    increasing too slowly as well? I don’t know anything about how
    hospitals get built/expanded – any obvious obstruction there?

    For universities, at least the supply of *top* universities doesn’t
    change much even as the population grows – at least when I was
    applying to college in 2008 there was definitely something of an
    “arms race” among ambitious college applicants as people were
    applying to more and more schools in the hopes of getting into any
    prestigious ones. (But also, as you mentioned, universities give a
    *lot* of financial aid, so I wonder if the cost of college that you
    cite is actually reflective of what people actually pay – at least
    at my school I believe the majority of students receive some
    financial aid, and it’s all grants, so while the nominal price is
    absurdly high, not that many people actually pay the whole thing –
    it’s basically a way to have a sliding scale without calling it that.)

    I’m not sure if this would apply to public schools since people
    don’t pay for that individually, though, so that would still need to
    be explained.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Incurian says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:02 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465503>
        ~new~

        Regarding the supply of hospitals:
        http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/con-certificate-of-need-state-laws.aspx

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465234>
36.
    RohanV says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:32 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465236>
    ~new~

    What about approaching the problem from the other side? What are the
    industries which /don’t/ exhibit cost disease? Groceries?
    Restaurants? Cars?

    Then you could see if there is a common factor in those industries
    which is missing in the affected industries.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        hoghoghoghoghog says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:18 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465475>
        ~new~

        Boring answer is that the common factor is high/low cost growth.
        After all, why should industries with high/low cost growth see
        costs grow for the same reason? There are an awful lot of
        industries.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465236>
37.
    Rachael says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:06 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465245>
    ~new~

    I agree with Michael Cohen, isn’t it just that “inflation” is being
    underestimated, and the increases in infrastructure/health/education
    costs reflect the true rate of inflation? If inflation is currently
    calculated based on the cost of food, clothes and consumer goods,
    and those things are getting cheaper (due to improvements in
    manufacturing and farming tech, and globalisation and sweatshop
    labour), then goods and services which are getting more expensive at
    a normal rate, unaffected by these reductions, will appear to suffer
    from cost disease.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        drabiega says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:14 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465374>
        ~new~

        I would argue that we’re way past the point where the simple
        concept of inflation is useful for discourse about the economy.
        The subject of price level changes is incredibly complex and
        increasingly important, but for some reason all discussion on
        the matter has been stunted by this incredibly simplistic model.
        We need to get past that way of thinking and starting talking
        about the interplay of price levels, how our spending is
        shifting between different types of costs, etc.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465245>
          o
            Randy M says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:42 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465395>
            ~new~

            Doesn’t the concept of inflation come from changes in the
            money supply? In practice it refers to the increase of
            prices, but shouldn’t it only mean the increase in prices
            due to this one mechanism (that is of course hard to quantify)?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465374>
              +
                David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 11:50 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465454>
                ~new~

                That’s backwards – increase in prices is the definition,
                money supply is one mechanism. Some discredited theories
                assumed that only a change in money supply could cause
                inflation, but increasing monetary velocity does the
                same thing – as can higher borrowing, etc.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465395>
      *
        Creutzer says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:31 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465388>
        ~new~

        If you view it that way, you’re still just shifting the puzzle,
        though, namely to: why are real incomes falling to precipitously?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465245>
      *
        kronopath says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 2:31 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465972>
        ~new~

        I thought of this as well, so I looked it up and turns out the
        CPI does explicitly include the costs of things like medical
        care, education, and housing.
        <https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpifaq.htm#Question_7> Of course,
        that’s combined with other costs such as food, apparel,
        transportation, and recreation, and it’s hard to know (with my
        limited knowledge of US economics) whether either of these sets
        of categories skews the other.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465245>
38.
    Alex says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:29 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465252>
    ~new~

    Could it be because money supply has increased by about as much?

    Here’s M0
    <http://www.tradingeconomics.com/united-states/money-supply-m0>, M1
    <http://www.tradingeconomics.com/united-states/money-supply-m1> and
    M2 <http://www.tradingeconomics.com/united-states/money-supply-m2>

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
39.
    Markus Karner says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:33 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465254>
    ~new~

    All your reasons are good candidates but one factor stands out. This
    factor also explains why correcting for inflation is so hard. It is
    this: the same service / product / object now has a lot more
    features / higher quality, even as it is still categorized the same
    thing as 50 years ago. This distorts the entire comparison.

    You give these examples yourself: college includes a lot of goodies
    it did not use to include. Houses are bigger or have more goodies
    inside. Cars have a/c, GPS, and tons of safety features they did not
    use to have. Jobs come with way more benefits attached. The client
    at the hospital gets a larger settlement when s/he sues. Available
    treatment options are much higher. A lot of times, as you point out,
    the end customer did not ask for the multiplication of benefits in
    the package. Regulations did. In part, this was for safety, in part
    for environmental reasons, in part because of the wrong choice of
    risk trade off (overpaying for a very small reduction in risk). But
    the bottom line remains: we are not getting the “same” product we
    did 50 years ago. And if we did, many of us would be complaining.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Mark says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:10 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465265>
        ~new~

        35 years ago my grandpa used to use tracing paper to wipe his
        bottom. And thinking of it, that was what they used in schools too…

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465254>
          o
            Markus Karner says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:19 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465282>
            ~new~

            You might have been joking. But, perfect example. Today’s
            toilet paper is probably vastly superior AND produced in a
            more environmentally friendly way to the stuff of the
            1960’s. Probably by orders of magnitude. None of this counts
            for inflation adjustment.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465265>
              +
                The original Mr. X says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:30 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465289>
                ~new~

                My parents used to use tracing paper too when they were
                at school (1960s/70s Britain).

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465282>
              +
                Mark says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:31 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465290>
                ~new~

                Yep! It’s true – you never forget having to wipe your
                bottom with tracing paper. I used to avoid using the
                school toilets for that reason – probably saved on
                toilet cleaning costs as well.

                (That last one was a joke.)

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465282>
                  #
                    The original Mr. X says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 7:03 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465296>
                    ~new~

                    I remember once in the early 2000s I came across a
                    public toilet in an out-of-the-way part of northern
                    England which still had tracing paper instead of
                    normal toilet paper. As you say, a truly
                    unforgettable experience.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465290>
          o
            Deiseach says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:06 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465364>
            ~new~

            Don’t remind me, Mark. I never thought of it as tracing
            paper, but we’d have been better off with old newspapers! 🙂

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465265>
40.
    Chris Hibbert says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:51 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465260>
    ~new~

    Wouldn’t it be useful to look at where this is and isn’t happening
    in the economy? Housing is admittedly an outlier, but health care
    and education are heavily influenced by government provision or
    regulation. Contrast with technology, transportation, food,
    clothing, personal services, etc. And then compare to sectors of
    health care that are less regulated/subsidized like cosmetic surgery
    or lasek surgery. Again health expenses for pets goes against the
    grain, but the trend seems relatively clear.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
41.
    Null Hypothesis says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:51 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465261>
    ~new~

    This is just some vague inkling – but I wonder how much (somewhere
    between 0% and 100%) additional administration jobs and duties are
    responsible for this?

    Going to one of Scott’s many points – people doing extra work that
    amounts to pushing paper around in /support/ of the various goods
    and services we actually want, rather than the goods and services
    themselves. Transaction costs, basically. Creeping Overheard.

    Is there some simple way to gauge percentage of administrative jobs?
    Is there some way to compare how many direct-service people are
    working now vs 30 years ago? Has our population grown, but the extra
    population taken on fruitless jobs.

    To clarify, what I mean by fruitless is this: How much do you pay in
    taxes this year? No idea? Pay an accountant $500 to figure it out.
    This money doesn’t go towards paying your taxes, or helping anyone
    (and lets assume the accountant could have spent the time accounting
    something more fruitful elsewhere). It doesn’t acomplish anything
    except what number to write on the check you mail to the government.
    It’s an annual government-mandated math test, where you solve some
    equations and forms, and then you get the arbitrary number out, and
    then that number serves no more usefulness.

    I’m not disagreeing with counting your taxes, or necessarily saying
    “flat tax solves everything.” But when you get down to it, that’s an
    activity we spend time and resources on that gets nobody what we
    want. It’s just overhead. And we could get rid of it if we deemed
    the side-effects from the increased coordination as insufficient to
    warrant the cost.

    Also, how much have computers played a roll in letting us do a bunch
    of things we could never do before… that don’t actually give us any
    benefit? A lot of these trends seem to track with widespread
    computers. Pure coincidence, or maybe causal? If you couldn’t use a
    computer, how would your job be different, and how would your
    overall end-product be different?

    The cynical part of me says that college is much the same thing –
    spending 4 years researching medieval Renaissance poetry? it gets
    you a degree, and gives you a leg-up on getting a job, but you spent
    $100,000 of resources and 4 years of your life doing something
    arbitrary that won’t actually make you better at your job. It’s just
    a signaling arms race – you need a degree because your competitors
    all have degrees, and they provide some sort of correlation with
    reduced risk of employees.

    So, how much time, and manpower, and resources are devoted to tasks
    like these? How much of population spends time doing that now? Are
    we paying more for things because there’s just a ton more overhead?
    How can doctors see fewer patients for less time? Are more people
    going to a hospital than normal? If they’re paying more, and doctors
    are paid the same, why wouldn’t more doctors just be hired? Are
    doctors doing more administration work and overhead now than before?

    Lot of random questions – no coherence. Sorry about that. But I’m
    just trying to figure out where all our time and resources go – and
    if there are some easy large numbers of administration or
    ‘time-spent-doing-actual-job’ metrics that can find out where this
    productivity sink is.

    The only thing I can conclude is that for some ethereal reason, we
    have two task masters that come by at noon and midnight – one wants
    a hole in the field, and one wants no hole, and we’re just spending
    a bit of our time digging it up and filling it back in because
    that’s what we’re being told to do. And over the last 30 years,
    they’ve started coming by more frequently, now every other hour, so
    we have to dig and fill 12 times as many holes a day.

    The mind boggles. It also might be a good argument for founding new
    micro-countries every now and then on artificial islands, or in
    South America, or in Coventry (The Crazy Years are here, after all)
    where the entire dynamic of society and business and productivity
    starts from scratch, to see how much of that lost efficiency has
    just evolved over time and can be removed wit a hard reset.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:34 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465390>
        ~new~

        Gauging administrative versus teaching jobs in schools is easy;
        https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_213.10.asp

        The data has more info Librarians, Teachers Aides, etc. But
        headline figures:

        1950:
        District Staff total: 33,642
        Teachers: 913,671
        Principals: 43,137

        1970:
        District Staff total: 65,282
        Teachers: 2,016,244
        Principals:90,593

        1990:
        District Staff total: 75,868
        Teachers: 2,398,169
        Principals: 127,417

        2010:
        District Staff total: 133,833
        Teachers: 3,099,095
        Principals: 165,047

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465261>
          o
            Null Hypothesis says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 9:50 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465804>
            ~new~

            Well, for schools that doesn’t look like much n terms of
            asymmetric growth. Teachers x3 and Admin x4 from 1950 to
            2010. Not insignificant, but not gigantic.

            Any indication on how many students are being serviced by
            all these teachers and admin? Have the number of students
            tripled since 1950, or are we employing a lot more people –
            teacher /and/ admin to instruct the same number of kids?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465390>
              +
                David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:32 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466076>
                ~new~

                It’s about the same number of kids – though their
                demographics have shifted a ton, and we are including
                many more kids that used to drop out early.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465804>
42.
    Byron says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:00 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465263>
    ~new~

    One possible answer is Debt.

    The difference between now and then is basically debt. Every
    publicly traded company carries a large amount of debt. Every
    government has an enormous amount of debt. Every person has maxed
    out credit cards, is mortgaged to the hilt, and can barely make
    their car payments. This constant, non-stop load massively increases
    the price of everything.

    A bridge is no longer a bridge. It’s a source of long term interest
    payments. A mortgage isn’t a mortgage – it’s 25 years of AAA-rated
    securities paying 4%. Companies have to carry ‘poison pill’ debt to
    stop corporate raiders using junk bonds to take them over and break
    them up. A car isn’t a car – it’s £1000 downpayment, easy monthly
    payments of £300 for four years.

    It doesn’t explain everything. But the enormous debt burden we as
    modern societies carry is out of all proportion historically. It’s
    also the reason inequality is increasing – those that own or manage
    the debt get rich, the rest of us carry this growing parasite.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:40 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465393>
        ~new~

        Data indicates that current Government Debt/GDP ratios aren’t
        unusual for post-war America – so you’d need something else to
        explain what CHANGED since the 1950s.
        https://www.thebalance.com/national-debt-by-year-compared-to-gdp-and-major-events-3306287

        And the change in Household/Corporate debt doesn’t really
        explain it well either, either in terms of correlations over
        time, or in terms of microeconomic theory.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465263>
          o
            John Schilling says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 1:35 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465528>
            ~new~

            According to your data, the US government debt-to-GDP ratio
            averaged 66% during the 1950s, compared to 105% now. I would
            think that increase is a strong candidate for something that
            has CHANGED since the 1950s.

            If by “not unusual for post-war America” you mean
            /immediate/ postwar America, 1946-1947, sure, we are as
            indebted now as we were when we had just started paying off
            the debt from World War II. And suffering a variety of
            substantial economic hardships, though hard to quantify on a
            price basis because they involved things that hadn’t been
            manufactured for sale in half a decade or more (e.g. new
            cars and houses).

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465393>
              +
                David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 4:30 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465657>
                ~new~

                You want to look at the entire graph, instead of picking
                on a specific year.

                Did all of this cost inflation start in 2008, to
                coincide with the huge rise in government debt? No – so
                this functions as evidence, albeit weak, AGAINST the
                explanation.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465528>
                  #
                    John Schilling says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 5:11 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465687>
                    ~new~

                    You picked “post-war America” and “since the 1950s”,
                    not me. You were wrong about the facts for the
                    specific eras you picked. Perhaps you might want to
                    sit back a while and think about how to more clearly
                    express whatever argument you are trying to make.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465657>
43.
    Jack V says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:25 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465269>
    ~new~

    Hm. You’re right, I find it really hard to believe there’s an
    underlying thing here, but your evidence is persuasive, so I think I
    probably *should* do.

    My first thought was exactly about safety. When building the first
    subway tunnels, how many people died? How many houses collapsed? I
    don’t know, but I *hope* we’ve got a lot better about that kind of
    accident (I don’t know if it was worth it). Life expectancy has gone
    up quite a bit, does that account for increased healthcare spending?

    But you’re right, a similar thing seems to happen in several
    different sector,s which suggests it needs related underlying
    causes, not a case-by-case justification.

    My next thought was, has anyone done a decent country-by-country
    comparison? The UK sounds like America if possibly less so. But do
    all countries have the same tendency? Or do some have cost disease
    in construction but not healthcare, or vice versa?

    FWIW, from outside the US it just seems like the health insurance
    industry is why US healthcare is SO expensive. But it seems like
    healthcare costs are increasing in most developed countries too,
    even if America’s is higher, so there’s some other problem that’s
    not dependent on that.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:47 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465272>
        ~new~

        As Megan McArdle has pointed out
        <https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2014-04-30/single-payer-would-make-health-care-worse>,
        the US doesn’t actually have a health-care cost growth problem.
        The US /had/ a health care cost growth problem in the 1970s and
        1980s. Since then, our cost growth has been at about an average
        level for OECD countries, but because it was starting from a
        higher baseline, the total expenditure per capita is almost
        double the average.

        Most simple explanations for how to save money that people come
        up with (“bulk negotiation!” etc) don’t apply here; read the
        linked article if you’re curious, as she goes through a lot of
        explanations and tears them apart in great detail with a lot of
        data. The one thing she doesn’t address that’s a
        frequently-cited significant cost factor (but not nearly as
        significant as people think; prescription drug spending is only
        10% of US medical spending
        <https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/downloads/highlights.pdf>)
        is that the US essentially subsidizes pharmaceutical development
        for the entire world; see here
        <https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2013-10-14/u-s-consumers-foot-the-bill-for-cheap-drugs-in-europe-and-canada>
        for that explanation.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465269>
          o
            wysinwygymmv says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:52 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465404>
            ~new~

            Just about every other source I can find on health care
            costs make it look like the rate of US cost increases has
            been greater in the 90’s and 2000’s as well.

            In fact, looking at McArdle’s graphs, her data suggest the
            same. Look at 1998-2002 — there’s a huge increase in US
            health care spending that doesn’t show up for any of the
            other countries in the graph. She kinda skirts around this
            by using “even if” language, but that seems like a red
            herring to me. Yeah, even if the costs increases were the
            same, US would be paying more. But the cost increases
            weren’t actually the same and the US is paying
            proportionately more still.

            She also does a fishy thing where she separates government
            from private health care expenditures in the US and assumes
            that under single payer the whole thing would be government
            expenditures and therefore worse than the combined
            government/private expenditures. This ignores the impact of
            the structure of the market on costs and prices, which…seems
            crazy to me.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465272>
              +
                talldave2 says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 3:28 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466295>
                ~new~

                The increases were lumpy, so a four-year trend tells us
                little. The long term trends are clearly what McArdle
                says they are.

                McArdle’s whole point is that the structure of the
                market makes no difference to spending trends. To simply
                assume that prices would immediately fall ignores every
                empirical data point, including when Vermont actually
                attempted to implement such a plan and immediately
                discovered the opposite was true.

                The US just does a lot more spending at the margins
                where benefits are smaller, and OECD levels of spending
                are probably rational given how much poorer they are
                than the US. There’s an argument that US levels are
                inefficient, but socialists rarely make that argument
                because Americans are horrified by ideas like “death
                panels” deciding who gets care.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465404>
44.
    CP says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:05 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465276>
    ~new~

    Hi Scott —

    I think many of your points make sense. But I want to extend your
    second, fifth, and sixth points to show how markets, risk tolerance,
    and insurance (which I’m going to use instead of ‘regulation’) are
    connected.

    One way to do this is to point out that, if you believe economists
    and actuaries are capable of doing a good job of assessing and
    evaluating risks, that certain things aren’t more expensive today:
    it’s just that past costs were hidden because they weren’t
    identified, enumerated, quantified, and incorporated. So, what was,
    decades ago, a significant but invisible risk borne by, say, a
    single patient in a hospital somewhere, is now spread out across the
    population; or rather, the risk borne by a patient has been shifted
    to the doctor, and then spread across the population of doctors.
    Ditto colleges that used to not be required, by sheer financial
    prudence, to employ campus medical and mental health staff, VPRs, HR
    professionals, and so on.

    Now: the question is *why* has this tendency toward capture emerged.
    Above, I read you to suggest it is because we have become less
    risk-tolerant through some emotional or moral change in character,
    which aligns with the usual (and usually grossly inaccurate)
    parables about e.g. hot coffee lawsuits. I would instead claim that
    it is because markets are working, just not in the way that people
    think they do.

    The trend toward regulation (if you want it to sound bad and scary)
    or insurance (if you want it to sound prudent and technocratic) is
    driven by the same force that drives many things in the economy:
    it’s big business! The financialization of the economy, and of
    possible derivative economies, is the market at work, seeking new
    ways to extract surplus value now that the old ways (for example,
    starting a war with a foreign nation so they are required to buy
    your exported opium without you being required to give them much in
    return (or, if you prefer something more current, enforcing
    near-slavery conditions of rare earth mining that produces
    smartphones sold back to the miners for more than they made for
    mining its components)) are seen, to a greater or lesser degree, as
    abhorrent, along with the general tendency of the rate of profit to
    fall. Meanwhile, finance capital is abstracted from physical and
    labor capital, meaning it can be generated and manipulated and
    derived more quickly than traditional forms or within traditional
    markets.

    In other words, higher costs, as the result of more
    regulation/insurance, and concomitant with lowered risk tolerance,
    is not because markets are breaking down, but because markets are
    working as they are supposed to work: to expropriate value from the
    holders of capital, particularly this case financial capital, to the
    economic detriment of those subject to its actuarial terms,
    analogous to how more primitive forms of capital accumulation relied
    on the expropriation of value from slaves or the captive earth.

    Cost disease is a symptom of advanced capitalism working as
    expected/predicted. It is only a disease to those afflicted by it;
    to those who benefit from it, i.e. the broader
    finance-insurance-regulatory regime, it is the engine of profit itself.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        teageegeepea says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:51 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465709>
        ~new~

        The bit about campuses hiring mental health professionals
        reminded me of Jonathan Haidt’s recent writings on the topic.
        Since colleges have more mental health services, you might
        expect mental health outcomes to be better for today’s students.
        But the opposite appears to be the case. I was going to bring up
        rates of suicide, but then I remembered that suicide is a far
        bigger issue in the military now than it was in the past. Greg
        Cochran <https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/20/the-experts/>
        might attribute our military’s troubles to listening to
        psychiatrists in the first place, as totalitarian governments
        got better performance without them.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465276>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 8:02 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465780>
            ~new~

            Personally, I attribute it to a general decline in macho
            masculine culture, though I don’t have any data to support
            it. But I tend to think that the brutish, insensitive,
            chest-thumping culture traditionally associated with warrior
            males serves a very important purpose in desensitizing them
            from the horror their actions are inflicting. In civilian
            society, this is of course a huge negative. But in a
            military, it’s a desirable quality to the extent that you
            want your soldiers to be able to kill the enemy without
            suffering mental breakdowns. See also: Black Mirror
            <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5709234/?ref_=ttep_ep5>.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465709>
      *
        userfriendlyyy says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 7:29 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466377>
        ~new~

        Ding Ding Ding!!! We have a winner!
        Explained in gory detail here:
        http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2016/08/dirk-bezemer-and-michael-hudson-finance-is-not-the-economy.html

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465276>
45.
    hamilyonblog says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:13 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465280>
    ~new~

    Underpaid/free labour (by women and black) that was very common back
    then. Much less now. This sosiety shift alone could double every
    price in economy, while keeping wages stagnant.

    I.e. household income rose even if wages did not.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        teageegeepea says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:53 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465711>
        ~new~

        The cases of women & blacks seem rather different. There’s been
        a large entry of women into the laborforce, while employment
        among blacks (mostly men) has declined.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465280>
46.
    Mark says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:23 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465285>
    ~new~

    Beware of confirmation bias!

    WoooooOOOoooOOOoooOOO!

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
47.
    onyomi says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:30 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465288>
    ~new~

    My view is that we are actually much poorer than we think
    (combination of all official measures wildly underestimating
    inflation and overestimating growth with each serving to mask the
    other)–maybe even poorer than our parents, if probably not our
    grandparents–a fact which is obscured by dazzling technology.

    There does, however, seem to be a generalizable version of
    Parkinson’s Law (“work expands to fill the time alloted”–>”costs
    expand to expend the resources available”), especially in cases when
    the consumer is disconnected from the cost-benefit analysis by a
    third party in some way.

    If, for example, you offer a huge subsidy to help people buy x, but
    pay the providers of x rather than just giving the consumer extra
    money to spend as he wishes (though even that will push up prices
    somewhat generally, of course), the cost will tend to rise such that
    no x which costs less than the value of the subsidy will continue to
    exist, though not as a result of spending more on the things the
    consumer would have chosen were he making the decision directly, or,
    I think, even more commonly on /precisely/ the things the consumer
    would choose to spend more on /if/ he were required to spend more on
    a thing than he really wants to.

    That is, given a choice between a $5,000/year elite education
    without a lot of fun activities and material comforts and a
    $50,000/year elite education with a lot of fun activities and
    material comforts, most students will take the $5,000/year
    education. But if all elite educations cost $50,000, the student
    will chose the one with the awesome activities and material comforts
    over the one with better paid professors, because ultimately they’re
    in it not for the professors but for a piece of paper saying
    “recipient of elite education.” If you force them to spend $50,000
    to get that piece of paper they’d rather have a lot of fun doing it
    than go to class with happier, more erudite professors.

    To make a Bryan Caplan-ish argument: maybe the problem is that we
    are, actually getting more of what we want, in many cases, but we
    don’t want what we think we want (we think we want job stability,
    respect, time with our children, etc. but actually want super soft
    toilet paper, giant houses with central air, SUVs, private hospital
    rooms, etc.), especially when we are actively discouraged against
    thrift.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
48.
    Anon. says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:44 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465292>
    ~new~

    Spelling: heterogenity -> heterogeneity

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
49.
    janrandom says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:54 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465294>
    ~new~

    This is really scary. And while it might be worst in the US this can
    be seen elsewhere too.

    The money has to go somewhere. As they say money is not lost it just
    goes into someone else’s pockets. Thus if we could track the big
    money flows (something I’d love to see) we could just apply network
    flow algorithms to see where it goes. With such a thing we could
    tease apart the given candidate explanations:

    * First – if it were some inflation misadjustment we would just see
    a uniformly scaled network.

    * Second – we’d just see larger and larger flow from customers into
    the network but uniform from there on.

    * Third – we’d see it in a relative change in the sub networks of
    public and private sector.

    * Fourth – I’m not sure how you’d see that in the network – maybe
    total internal flows in sub nets.

    * Fifth – relative change in flow to law

    * Sixth – my favorite, but I don’t see how that effect might show up
    in the network

    * Seventh – we’d need to have distinct tracking for differnt
    economic groups

    * Eighth – flow to pension (might require distinct flows by age)

    * Section V, “the rich” – we’d see it in network flow toward the rich

    Other possible explanations:

    * Other reallocations within society, e.g. between age groups,
    economic groups, social groups

    * Global monetary flow e.g. to from other countries, change in flow
    between economic sectors

    Problem: We don’t know the money flow network and there seem to be
    incentives to keep it unknown. But maybe it can be approximated or
    the dark flow be bounded?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:28 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465381>
        ~new~

        This isn’t secret, it’s just an exercise in data analysis. We
        don’t even need network flows, we can see the answers directly.

        For public grade/high schools, we know basically exactly where
        money is/goes;
        https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_236.10.asp

        For health care corporations, they publish their income
        statements – we can see their total income / profit levels, and
        similar; http://www.justfacts.com/healthcare.asp

        People do the analysis, and usually they come to conclusions
        that it’s a lot of things all working together.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465294>
          o
            janrandom says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 7:13 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465761>
            ~new~

            This is “only” the part about the educational system. It
            doesn’t tell you where the money goes further down the
            corporations. What ends up in whose pockets. You don’t see
            that. Also not the cross connections between clusters (law,
            health, finance). Sure lots of data is there. Pulling all
            together is the hard part. I am yet to see a diagram about
            these flows. I once saw one that took the flow in German
            health care apart – but also in the public sector only.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465381>
50.
    tmk says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:59 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465295>
    ~new~

    I think you are dismissing comfort levels too easily. Campus
    services, private rooms in hospitals, etc. If today’s college
    students have grown up in large houses with well-stocked fridges and
    driving everywhere, they will expect something similar in college.
    They will not put up with draughty halls, 1940’s cafeteria food,
    cycling and a minimal administration that ignores complaints.
    Likewise boomers with large comfortable suburban houses with not
    accept a bed in a crammed hospital ward.

    This may look like complaining that people have got to comfortable,
    weak, etc, but it may be perfectly rational choises. If it is ok to
    spend money on SUVs, comfy sofas, big houses and fancy food, why not
    on campus gyms and private hospital rooms? People have gotten richer
    over time, as you see in the GDP/capita growth, and they will spend
    that money.

    I think it is similar with playgrounds. back when many children got
    polio or TB it was hard to care to much about playground injuries.
    Today those diseases are gone, so people chase smaller risks.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Jugemu says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 7:47 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465303>
        ~new~

        I think this is a reasonable take in some cases. Doesn’t
        (directly) explain some things like subway tunnels though.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465295>
          o
            tmk says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 8:08 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465311>
            ~new~

            To continue on this theme, teacher salaries may not have
            increased much, but there are now more well-paid alternative
            careers, especially for women. It wouldn’t surprise me if
            the average teacher is less intelligent today than a couple
            of decades ago. That is not meant as a slight against
            teachers, it is just people responding to incentives.

            For subways: Could it be that people today will not put up
            with the kind of back-breaking work of building a subway in
            1900? Especially not intelligent and capable people who have
            much better options. You could hire the button 10% to build
            subways, but can you trust them with heavy equipment?

            Virbie has an interesting story above about an efficient and
            well-managed hotel in India. I think the hotel owner is
            rather intelligent, but because of few opportunities he is
            running a cheap little hotel. In America he would perhaps be
            running a far more economically productive tech company. The
            hotel would be part of a chain, managed by someone less
            intelligent who isn’t given much autonomy and is expected to
            follow standardized procedures.

            Scott mentions South Korea as a comparable country with
            cheaper subways, but Korea still has a lot of poor people.
            It has developed quickly, but there are still many people
            who could have benefited from education and more productive
            employment, but instead have to build subways. I think South
            Korea will see costs boom as that generation gets older.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465303>
      *
        Grey Enlightenment <http://smartistera.com> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 8:14 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465313>
        ~new~

        that’s a good point…a campus today has vastly more amenities
        than a campus in 1940..why are people surprised that it should
        cost more too?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465295>
          o
            spork says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:54 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465820>
            ~new~

            It is possible that with an increase of available amenities,
            we have come to rely on amenities for fulfillment, leading
            to a self-reinforcing cycle? Listen to a retiring professor
            wistfully recount the old days, and you get the impression
            that some mixture of drinking, reading, chasing tail,
            conversing, writing, pranks and fairly unstructured sports
            was sufficient for thoroughly enjoying college. We might
            have unlearned the art of enjoying ourselves in those ways,
            so we use resources/amenities as substitutes to get to the
            same level of satisfaction.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465313>
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:34 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465339>
        ~new~

        /I think it is similar with playgrounds. back when many children
        got polio or TB it was hard to care to much about playground
        injuries. Today those diseases are gone, so people chase smaller
        risks./

        In my current job, I’m back in education (an early intervention
        service for children with special and additional needs). I’m
        only clerical support (thank God!) and our service is one of the
        ones selected to implement and trial these
        <http://siolta.ie/siolta_services.php#sessional_5>
        recommendations. We have sixteen different areas to cover and we
        have to provide detailed breakdown of how we’re complying and
        using these standards. (I’m going cross-eyed typing these up and
        pulling our policies etc. from everywhere to show we’re
        compliant and turning it all into a readable document and not a
        brain-melting unholy tome out of a Lovecraft story).

        I’ll give you a sample of the headings for one area,
        Environments. This is /one/ component of eight in /one/ section
        of /sixteen/:

            Enriching environments, both indoor and outdoor (including
            materials and equipment) are well-maintained, safe,
            available, accessible, adaptable, developmentally
            appropriate, and offer a variety of challenging and
            stimulating experiences.

            Component 2.4 – The environment promotes the safety, both
            indoors and outdoors, of all children and adults

            2.4.1
            What procedures/routines do you have in place to regularly
            ensure that the outdoor play area is clean and free from
            hazards?

            2.4.2
            How is the outside area secured and maintained to ensure
            children’s safety and protection from harm?
            Think about (e.g.)
            Covering (e.g., ponds, pits, sheds, etc.)
            Fencing
            Child-proof gate for entry
            Perimeter fence
            Gate latches

            2.4.3
            How do you ensure that your setting remains free from health
            hazards?
            Think about (e.g.)
            Storage of cleaning materials/chemicals/poisons
            Storage of waste materials
            Storage of medication

            2.4.4
            In what way is the indoor environment/equipment designed to
            reduce risk of injury to children?
            Think about (e.g.)
            No sharp corners on furniture or fittings
            Heaters guarded from children to ensure that they are not at
            risk of burns
            Water temperature in the bathrooms maintained at a suitable
            temperature (below 40° Celsius)
            Passageways are free of obstacles
            Electrical sockets are out of reach/covered
            Floor coverings are secured
            Stair gate is used where necessary
            Choking hazards are removed
            Finger guards on doors and cupboards
            Non-slip flooring
            Safety devices on windows and doors
            Safety glass
            Appropriate safety symbols
            Removal of trailing flexes from children’s reach
            Cords of blinds and curtains are inaccessible
            Removal of broken/damaged equipment

            2.4.5
            Are all exits accessible and fully functioning in the case
            of an emergency?
            Think about (e.g.)
            Dual language signage (and other languages, as appropriate)
            Visual aids
            Evacuation procedures

            2.4.6
            Is the water source verified to be safe for human consumption?

            2.4.7
            In what way does your storage of materials and equipment
            ensure safety within the setting?
            Think about (e.g.)
            Storage areas for indoor equipment
            Storage areas for outdoor equipment
            Secured storage areas for children’s records
            Locked cupboard for the storage of hazardous/toxic materials
            Secure store for cleaning equipment
            Suitably high shelving
            Top heavy shelving is bolted or secured to the ground/wall

            2.4.8
            Do you have a fully stocked first aid kit that is easily
            accessed and available in each area of your setting?

            2.4.9
            What system is in place to ensure that smoke detectors, fire
            extinguishers, fire alarms and fire blankets are in working
            order and are serviced regularly?

            2.4.10
            Birth – 18 months
            How do you ensure that there are safe areas for babies outdoors?

            2.4.11
            12 – 36 months
            How do you ensure that there are safe areas for toddlers
            outdoors?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465295>
      *
        Matt Osterndorf says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 3:28 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465996>
        ~new~

            If today’s college students have grown up in large houses
            with well-stocked fridges and driving everywhere, they will
            expect something similar in college. They will not put up
            with draughty halls, 1940’s cafeteria food, cycling and a
            minimal administration that ignores complaints.

        My problem with this is that I’m paying roughly $2000 a month on
        food and housing, both of which I /must/ buy from my college. If
        I had the option to rent an apartment and buy my own groceries,
        I’d do it in a heartbeat and laugh all the way to the bank.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465295>
          o
            Matt M says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 5:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466019>
            ~new~

            Could you not have found a college that offered a similar
            level of prestige and expertise in your chosen field that
            did not have these restrictions?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465996>
              +
                MathEpic says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 5:46 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466023>
                ~new~

                    Could you not have found a college that offered a
                    similar level of prestige and expertise in your
                    chosen field that did not have these restrictions?

                Honestly, probably not.

                Prestige is a tricky thing to quantify, but as a culture
                we have decided having attractive dorms and other
                facilities is one of the things that “prestigious”
                universities do. Then if they have those facilities
                universities often designed the campus in such a way
                that attending students need to live on campus.

                Almost by definition, prestigious institutions will have
                those restrictions.

                It’s messed up, but from what I have observed that’s how
                it is.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466019>
                  #
                    pseudon says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:48 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466195>
                    ~new~

                    Our host studied in Europe. I honestly don’t
                    understand why it is that basically every American
                    not at least tries this. Many European universities
                    are for some reason basically begging for foreign
                    students.

                    (Granted, being European myself I don’t have a good
                    feeling for the prestige issues involved. I do
                    believe though that the academic quality is at least
                    comparable.)

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466023>
51.
    Cadie says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:17 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465299>
    ~new~

    Some of the difference between health care pricing in the 1970s and
    today is because the modern technology / medications cost a lot to
    develop, and there’s a price increase built in to compensate for
    that; the price to physically build the device or synthesize the
    medicine in a lab is lower than what it would be if you factored in
    research costs. You also have the cost of training nurses and
    doctors to use new machines. I doubt all this explains a large
    fraction of the increase, and for medication it mainly applies to
    branded medications still under patent, which excludes drugs
    developed before sometime in 2000-2005 (roughly) with a tiny handful
    of exceptions that got special extensions. I can’t imagine it
    explaining /none/.

    Doesn’t change the main point, of course. We’re still facing a price
    increase well beyond what’s truly necessary. But there costs to
    technological advancements that require extensive research, and
    these aren’t always obvious from the current production costs.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
52.
    buntchaot says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:35 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465301>
    ~new~

    does anyone know an easy way to get comparable data from common law
    vs non common law countries?

    would be interesting to know if commonlaw countries are consistently
    experiencing this effect more than others and if so what part of the
    effect might be due to risk of being sued to bankruptcy and no easy
    way to put a number on that risk, as some commenters pointed out.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
53.
    David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:38 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465302>
    ~new~

    I discussed a little bit of my initial thoughts on why I think the
    Cato graph is misleading.
    https://medium.com/@davidmanheim/deceptive-dataviz-and-confusing-data-uncomparables-in-education-a05a59a8d789

    It looks like Scott demolished a large part of my argument. But I
    still think the graph is misleading for the reasons I mentioned.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
54.
    Freddie deBoer says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:54 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465306>
    ~new~

    Scott, citing that Paul Campos piece uncritically undermines your
    claim about college. I rebutted it at length, but I’m afraid the
    rebuttal went down with my website. /Total/ student state
    expenditures are indeed up… because we’ve vastly increased the
    number of students going to college. /Per student state
    expenditures/ have dropped dramatically. Campos knows that. When
    challenged about it he’s evasive, because he knows it rebuts his
    claim. Of course when we increase total enrollment by a third in 10
    years – thanks to a bipartisan political effort – you’re going to
    get higher total expenditure. But per capita expenditures is what
    matters.

    Otherwise good piece. Of course college is getting far too expensive
    far too fast, but let’s be clear that total state college
    expenditures are rising because of a dramatic increase in attendance
    that has only recently leveled off somewhat. (Which does not
    undermine the point that college is far, far too expensive, even
    aside from it being inadequately funded.)

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Freddie deBoer says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 8:22 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465316>
        ~new~

        (ps a spectre is haunting Scott Alexander….)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465306>
          o
            herbert herberson says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:29 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465382>
            ~new~

            You ever see this, Freddie?
            http://www.rhizzone.net/article/2016/01/27/article-review-book-review-manufacturing-consent/

            There’s a special place in heck for the campus liberals who
            traumatized Alexander, because he’s been bumping against the
            obvious case for socialism without being able to cross the
            line for a long time. It’d be amazing to see such a powerful
            and prolific intellect finally break its chains, but I’m not
            sure what could manage it at this point

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465316>
              +
                Tarpitz says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 11:04 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466218>
                ~new~

                I’m sorry – what is the obvious case for socialism and
                where in the article you linked does it appear?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465382>
      *
        Aapje says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:09 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465367>
        ~new~

        Here is your own writing
        <http://web.archive.org/web/20160205002522/http://fredrikdeboer.com/2015/04/05/paul-f-campos-shows-how-not-to-talk-about-data/>,
        I assume you were referring to that article.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465306>
      *
        meltedcheesefondue says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:13 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465597>
        ~new~

        >Per student state expenditures have dropped dramatically.

        Establishing whether this is true or not seems massively
        important. Anyone got thoughts and evidence about the claim?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465306>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:09 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465685>
            ~new~

            For a look at California’s state spending on higher
            education per student, look at page 5 of this report
            <http://www.ppic.org/content/pubs/report/R_512HJR.pdf>.

            I don’t necessarily endorse the conclusions of the report,
            which are very hand-wringy special-interest pleading. But
            the data in that graph is solid and absolutely confirms what
            Freddie is saying. In constant 2010 dollars, California
            appropriations per student in UC were /halved/ between 1965
            and 2012.

            This doesn’t have any bearing on whether or not it’s good
            policy for the state to be subsidizing higher education in
            the first place. (I’m sure Freddie would say it’s an
            unqualified good; I’m extremely dubious.) But it does mean
            that examining tuition is not a good metric for overall
            college cost because subsidies have been changing
            dramatically in the background.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465597>
      *
        wintermute92 says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:28 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465610>
        ~new~

        It’s also worth noting that someone citing state college
        /tuition/ is probably being manipulative. A bunch of states have
        slashed government subsidy of state colleges, with the result
        that tuition has risen towards private levels without an
        increase in per-student spending.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465306>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:02 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465681>
            ~new~

            The other important factor when looking at state schools is
            to consider the balance of in-state versus out-of-state
            students. My wife worked in the UC administration up until a
            few months ago and has talked in the past about how the UCs
            are deliberately trying to expand their foreign student
            enrollment because they pay full freight and are subsidizing
            the in-state students. This has become absolutely crucial to
            undergraduate education in particular as state spending has
            decreased (in absolute dollars, none of the usual “failure
            to increase spending is a ‘cut'” crap) over the last decade.

            There’s currently a bill pending in the State Senate that
            would cap the maximum number of out-of-state students
            enrolled in the UC system to 10% of the total; it would be a
            disaster of epic proportions for the colleges. The idiots
            backing it think that foreign students are “stealing the
            place” of in-state students; they don’t realize that the
            universities wouldn’t be able to admit nearly as many
            in-state residents if the out-of-state money wasn’t picking
            up the bill.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465610>
              +
                Corey says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:10 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466066>
                ~new~

                Don’t worry, the Feds will render it moot with
                immigration policy.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465681>
      *
        Mark V Anderson says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 10:53 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466122>
        ~new~

            Per student state expenditures have dropped dramatically.

        My understanding is that US subsidies have greatly increased,
        more than offsetting any state decreases. I surfed the internet
        a bit and couldn’t find a source, but I think it is true. I
        think most of this consists of the large education credits on
        Form 1040, which didn’t exist 20 years ago.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465306>
      *
        talldave2 says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:31 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466296>
        ~new~

        Irrelevant to unit costs, which are still spiraling out of
        control for no good reason, and are the primary concern.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465306>
55.
    brownbat says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:56 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465307>
    ~new~

    1. Consider Jevons Paradox. Returns to education based on the
    changing economy could make it more valuable, even if the experience
    isn’t that different. And we’ve got a high material standard of
    living, so spending more to live longer but hitting diminishing
    returns might be expected.

    2. I mostly experienced malpractice from the dark side. Malpractice
    attorneys will describe the situation very differently than doctors.
    While perhaps in part, I don’t think this difference is fully
    explained by attorneys being pure evil. Specifically, they might
    take issue with your description of the system as leading so easily
    to millions, as if it’s a really great lottery ticket. Moreso, they
    might insist the system would be less oppressive if, for example,
    surgeons could somehow be induced to actually wash their hands and
    not leave surgical instruments in people. I know, most doctors will
    insist those are solved problems, and probably never read a
    handwashing compliance study, or spent much time with anyone who has
    carried a sponge or scalpel around inside of them for a while. Both
    sides have a bias, and while I’m reluctant to argue to moderation, I
    feel like the biases are generated by selective experiences on both
    sides, so I think it’s a reasonable heuristic to expect the truth to
    be somewhere in the middle here. Maybe I’m wrong though…

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Garrett says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:40 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465665>
        ~new~

        Could it be that doctors treat this like the general population
        treats terrorism? That is, a doctor doesn’t have a 5% chance
        per-patient of being found at-fault for $100. Instead, they have
        a 0.001% chance of being hit with a multi-million dollar
        judgement. That kind of thing can strike terror into a
        profession, even if it never happens to them personally. You
        only need a couple of borderline cases to scare the crap out of
        everybody.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465307>
          o
            LCL says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 9:36 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465905>
            ~new~

            There’s been an ongoing battle there between doctors and
            economists. The economists keep failing to find much
            evidence to support lawsuit risk as a driver of increasing
            costs. The doctors insist it’s crucial, and if economists’
            methods don’t find it then so much the worse for the
            economists’ methods.

            I’m pretty sure Scott has written about it before, but
            couldn’t find it in a quick search.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465665>
          o
            brownbat says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 1:07 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465954>
            ~new~

            Hmm, interesting way to look at it, thanks for the reply!

            To be clear, I think both professions are at risk of some bias.

            The malpractice attorney will see the checks and balances
            eliminating some frivolous cases every day, and that routine
            will make the properly disposed cases the more typical
            memory than the occasional frivolous case that slips
            through. So the attorney could under-rate the harms and
            frequency of frivolous cases.

            The doctor will talk about the one frivolous case that
            slipped through and ruined a colleague’s life, because the
            high harms will make that more salient, and they will
            over-estimate the probability of such a case. (Even if a
            doctor gets caught up in a frivolous case that’s quickly
            dismissed, they’re more likely to view that as evidence that
            the system nearly failed than as evidence that the system is
            good at filtering out bad cases.)

            So if each side is poorly calibrated, and in opposite
            directions, is there any improvement both might agree on?

            One possible improvement for both sides would be if we could
            convincingly improve the “sorting function” that
            distinguishes frivolous from serious medical transgressions.

            “Improvement” could mean greater consistency in hard cases,
            faster dispositions for frivolous cases, or some of both.

            Precertification of cases before they proceed that can be
            handled by electronic submission of documentation might help
            avoid disrupting doctor lives in the most frivolous cases.
            Machine-learning might even be helpful at all stages to
            improve consistency of adjudications.

            Either way, this discussion is typically punctuated with the
            extreme easy cases, but any notable improvement in
            consistency probably involves focus on the borderline cases,
            the ones that are hard to decide. Those strike me as
            under-discussed.

            Another facet of our justice system that non-experts find
            odd are punitive damages. These are designed to shape
            behavior, but are described as a windfall for the plaintiff.
            They’re a powerful tool to encourage preventions that are
            far cheaper than cures. However, if punitives were more
            commonly redirected, not to plaintiffs, but under a judicial
            order to funds that help prevent similar harms in the
            future, then they might not strike so many non-lawyers as
            unfair. The purpose of punitives would be more intuitive.

            (Sometimes people get confused about punitives because they
            cite exorbitant jury awards and ignore that those awards
            were later reduced by a judge. I don’t have a solution for
            that except that people should try to get all the facts first.)

            I just feel that people treat this as zero-sum between
            doctors, attorneys, and patients. It strikes me that there
            are possible pareto moves that are under-explored.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465665>
              +
                Garrett says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 4:55 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466908>
                ~new~

                Let’s look at 2 possible cases. The first is purely
                hypothetical, and the second is a highly
                modified-for-privacy-and-liability-to-the-point-it-doesn’t-make-sense
                reasons factual case.

                Case 1:
                Crazy guy goes to the ER for strep throat. Gets
                typical/appropriate antibiotic treatment. Files a
                lawsuit that the doctor didn’t provide informed consent
                of side-effect of his teeth itching. Hospital/insurance
                settles for $1000 and a tray of free turkey sandwiches.

                Case 2:
                Photogenic woman in college is studying to be an
                aeronautical engineer, with the goal of being an
                astronaut and the first human on mars. Starts to
                experience weird signs/symptoms, but only once in the
                presence of a medical doctor. ER doctor asks a about a
                family history (parents, siblings) of bleeding
                disorders. Doctor names off the top dozen-or-so bleeding
                disorders. Woman and mother say “no” to all of them. No
                idea what’s going on, but not obviously dying right now,
                sent home. Multiple presentations at the ER, but no
                obvious cause. Well, it turns out that the woman has a
                bleeding disorder and as a result her kidneys fail and
                now she needs to be on dialysis. Nobody on dialysis is
                going to be an astronaut, so the dream of going to space
                is crushed, despite being otherwise able to live a
                normalish life. It turns out that the woman’s sister
                also had hemophilia, which was one of the medical
                conditions explicitly asked of the women. But, since
                she’s photogenic, everybody’s afraid to risk going to
                court so there’s a settlement for multiple $MEGABUCKS.

                In case 1, the overhead for everybody involved is pretty
                minimal. It’s a clearly frivolous lawsuit, but worth
                settling for nuisance value. Nobody’s going to suffer
                from professional harm from having too many patients who
                sue over their teeth being itchy. There’s cost there,
                but it’s pretty constant, and requires little stress or
                time by the doctor. Perhaps and hour to read a summary
                of the complaint from the lawyer and to respond with
                “he’s crazy”. It’s annoying, but few doctors are shaking
                in fear of this kind of claim.

                In case 2, the doctor involved did due diligence. He
                asked the appropriate questions and was given incorrect
                information by the patient and the patient’s mother. If
                he was told “yes”, the cause could have been found
                before permanent harm was done. The alternative would be
                to do moderately-expensive testing for any suspected
                condition, even though the suspected conditions have a
                strong genetic component and would be expected to show
                up in the rest of the family if present and they deny
                having them.

                Here, the fear is that a jury, faced with a sympathetic,
                photogenic patient with a bad medical outcome and a
                life’s goal crushed will vote against a
                doctor/hospital/insurance company, despite all of the
                core points of Standard of Care having been met. It’s
                (merely) a bad outcome with a rare disease.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465954>
56.
    Grey Enlightenment <http://smartistera.com> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:59 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465309>
    ~new~

    /LOOK, REALLY OUR MAIN PROBLEM IS THAT ALL THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS
    COST TEN TIMES AS MUCH AS THEY USED TO FOR NO REASON, PLUS THEY SEEM
    TO BE GOING DOWN IN QUALITY, AND NOBODY KNOWS WHY, AND WE’RE MOSTLY
    JUST DESPERATELY FLAILING AROUND LOOKING FOR SOLUTIONS HERE./

    The issue is, hardly anyone pays out of pocket for anything anymore.
    There are so many programs to avoid or defer paying: medicaid,
    medicare, free emergency room treatment, generous student loan
    grants and financial aid for everyone of almost all income brackets,
    and student loan forgiveness.

    It costs $200k-$1,00,000 to treat leukemia..and the average
    household has negative net worth…even the uninsured get the same
    treatment…obviously, the typical patient is not paying that, so it
    gets added (along with other cancers and costly diseases) to
    per-capita medical costs.

    Furthermore, it’s very hard to collect on defaults. Costs may be
    rising at a rate greater than inflation also because people are
    requesting more total education and more total healthcare…instead of
    going to the hospital for life-threatening stuff, they go because of
    a stomach ache or a small cut, as well as more spending for elective
    procedures (nose realignment and stuff like that). Colleges and high
    schools have more elective programs , bigger campuses, more
    computers, more courses, more staff,, etc. than in the past. As the
    preceding examples show, quality is going up -colleges have vastly
    more courses and opportunities than a generation ago. Some colleges
    have AI and robotics labs,..stuff like that.

    Medical care has become vastly more advanced too: some cancers can
    now be cured and survival prolonged for many others…treatments for
    so many diseases have gotten better than generations ago. Imagine if
    we could extrapolate the chart of medical costs to the medieval
    times…yes it would have been cheaper but also competently useless
    (actually iatrogenic ) in terms of quality of care (as anesthesia
    did not exist and they believed in things like ‘humors)’. Does this
    answer the question? Probably not by a long shot, but just a
    perspective. IMHO, when you adjust the costs in terms of
    out-of-pocket costs vs. sticker costs, quality of care, and
    innovation, perhaps it’s not so bad.

    Government-level bureaucracy and waste, as well as inflated medical
    device and drug costs and billing by unscrupulous companies probably
    also plays a role although it seems intellectually lazy to to blame
    everything on that.

    This is one of those issues that seems impossible to ever resolve
    and is something we will just have to learn to live with.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:18 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465691>
        ~new~

        This argument that it’s about technological progress and
        associated cost would make sense if the US was living in an age
        of medical miracles and the rest of the OECD countries were
        still living with 1940s-level medicine. But that’s simply not
        the case.

        You can definitely make an argument that we’re subsidizing the
        R&D for the world, because treatments are developed with the
        expectation they can be sold in the US at full price to offset
        the capped prices they have to be sold at everywhere else. But
        that’s different from saying that the inherent cost of
        treatments are the driving cost factor.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465309>
          o
            talldave2 says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:19 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466289>
            ~new~

            It’s more true than you might think. The rest of the OECD
            does not, for instance, generally have hospitals with
            private rooms, and the US does several times more
            diagnostics and transplants and has stricter standards. We
            can argue those expenditures are not efficient, but that’s a
            tradeoff.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465691>
57.
    ilkarnal says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 8:41 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465322>
    ~new~

    If prices don’t go up, what happens? The system unravels. If dollars
    gain value sitting in your pocket you sit on your dollars,
    especially if you’re a bank.

    If we didn’t have the growth of the real estate, healthcare,
    finance, and education sectors, where would the economy be? This is
    what is keeping us afloat. If these industries stopped growing in
    revenue nothing would automatically pitch in to fill the void.
    Remember that your spending is someone else’s income. This is what
    pumps the lifeblood of the economy and keeps everything working,
    including really important stuff that you can’t live without.

    Economies need money pumps. Inflation is a money pump. Taxes are a
    money pump. Economies cannot stay afloat simply on the ‘voluntary,’
    if you like, spending of people who are not pressured by anything
    besides the desire for goods and services. People are too happy to
    sit on their cash, and since their spending is another person’s
    income, this leads to people struggling to make ends meet and being
    even more reluctant to part with their cash. It’s just totally
    nonfunctional. The alternatives are all much more ‘ugly’ than the
    dream of a society based on voluntary unpressured interactions, but
    they have the advantage of actually working.

    When you take a hard line on low taxes & free markets, you get low
    taxes and high mandatory payments of another sort, and ‘free’
    markets. Cost of housing isn’t a ‘tax’ but good luck not paying it.
    Education and healthcare are a little more gray but it takes a
    really thick skull to claim that people can just take them or leave
    them in the modern world. It’s pretty much involuntary spending.
    Hell, if I get taken while unconscious into an ambulance they will
    hand me the bill even though I didn’t agree to pay anything.

    There’s a place for purely voluntary, transparent transactions, with
    negligible trickery or coercion involved. That place happens to be
    fairly small. People need to just accept that for technical reasons
    economies have to be top-down to a pretty large extent, and decide
    whether they want their masters to be formally designated as such or
    assigned on an opaque ad-hoc basis, responsible in principle for
    their well-being or responsible in principle for milking them for as
    much cash as possible.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 9:15 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465328>
        ~new~

        /If these industries stopped growing in revenue nothing would
        automatically pitch in to fill the void./

        But what Scott seems to be asking is “Where is the money
        /going/?” It’s not going into wages, it’s not going into reduced
        working hours, it isn’t all going into lining the pockets of the
        shareholders or investors.

        You can’t spend what you don’t have in your paypacket, and if
        the money is going into buildings not wages, then it’s not
        raising incomes to drive spending to pump the economy.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465322>
          o
            tomfoolery says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 9:24 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465332>
            ~new~

            Where did the money go? I’d hypothesize capture by the
            professional/managerial class. (And yes, like probably most
            of you, I’m also a professional, so this is self-criticism).
            At the very highest level, this about CEO’s and bankers
            approving themselves YUGE bonuses and salaries (and hence
            why productivity gains don’t show up either in profits or in
            working class / peon salaries). Now of course the surplus
            has to be there first, but public companies really aren’t
            about profit maximation. For CEO’s, the main thing is to
            meet analyst expectations. They manage this both by talking
            the expectations down, but also by spending surplus on
            themselves or vanities.

            In non-profit enterprises like the government that also
            control salaries, this just shows up in different ways –
            most common is in “empire building” by senior managers, or
            by investing in projects with psychic reward – they are
            “leading edge” or politically favorable, or
            virtue-signalling, whatever.

            At lower levels, or even other high levels where you can’t
            set your own salary, the cost shows up in other ways –
            usually by a mid-level person who can capture some surplus
            begins “building their empire” / hiring lots of junior
            staff. They benefit both by less unpleasant work for
            themselves and through those psychic benefits that come from
            being the boss, but also by providing a security gap. I.e.,
            when layoffs or cuts periodically do come, then I have a
            layer of staff I can let go without my own job being at
            risk. This of course assumes they are able to capture some
            surplus, but it’s not that hard – budgets are sandbagged,
            you luck into more revenue, etc. Or maybe it’s like my
            daughter’s doctor who pushed for the procedure he’d get paid
            for, vs. the slightly better one for her that someone else
            gets paid for.

            Those of you who are economists might expect that this would
            show up in higher administrative costs, but you are really
            underestimating professionals to think this. Professionals
            are (usually) way too smart to classify their extra hires as
            admin. Example – I could probably finish the project with 2
            people, but I can get a budget for 5 and an extra six
            months. Do I hire an admin assistant, or just some extra
            junior people to have around?

            The main assumption here is that professionals are best
            positioned to capture surplus (vs. labor or capital
            shareholders). Given their inside knowledge and general
            savvy, I think this plausible. I’d love to see any studies
            on this topic – it seems to bear out in income disparity
            stats as well as why not all returns go to capital as Scott
            points out, though I probably have some confirmation bias
            going on there. The other big assumption is that there is
            lots of surplus – but one way to read Scott’s stats are that
            the costs are just surpluses accrued by large organizations.

            Supporting anecdote in the other direction – our kids go to
            a private religious school with $5k/kid tuition and good
            results. Costs are low basically because the woman who runs
            it is a saint – she’s happy with her only possessions being
            her books and 10 dresses in the closet of a very small house
            across the street. It sets the tone for the whole
            institution, which doesn’t spend on niceties most other
            schools (private and public) expect. If only we could
            replicate sanctity 😉

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465328>
          o
            ilkarnal says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 9:46 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465346>
            ~new~

            It’s going into wages, in very large part.
            <https://www.bls.gov/spotlight/2009/health_care/images/figure04_ces.gif>
            Obvs. Someone described a corporate dynamic where you want
            to hire people because that means you’re in charge of more
            people, and thus more important and prestigious. This is a
            better way to burn money than increasing wages, which makes
            the people you’re in charge of more prestigious! Disaster!
            Better give yourself a healthy raise and hire a bunch more
            underlings.

            Now, if you follow any nurses or doctors you’re aware that
            under-staffing is a big problem. How can this happen when
            employment in that sector has quadrupled as the population
            only rose 60% or so??? Well, clearly the extra people aren’t
            doing anything particularly useful. Which shouldn’t be that
            surprising, given how they got there.

            Although come to think of it the proportion of old people
            has grown considerably, and old people produce an astounding
            amount of useless sisyphean busywork in the health sector.
            Perhaps the ability of the system to reject at least some of
            this useless busywork has eroded as lawyers have pushed
            their spigot deep into its juicy flesh. And the workforce is
            getting older and probably less vigorous as well. They might
            just legitimately need way more people to do a worse job. Of
            course, if all health care workers just went straight to
            work at 16-18 instead of wasting several years and tons of
            money on mostly useless education that would help things
            considerably.

            Health care workers want to keep the price of admission in
            years and dollars high in order to avoid invalidating their
            investment and keep job security – the best way to maintain
            a scam is to give all the suckers a trickle of the dough.
            Naturally the ‘education’ shysters make that effort vain by
            swallowing more and more people into their system, often
            with government’s help. Seeing the value of their
            credentials erode just makes everyone hold onto what is left
            even tighter. I wonder how far the scam has progressed since
            the 60’s… How many years and dollars were spent by the
            average health care worker then?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465328>
      *
        DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 2:58 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466276>
        ~new~

            If prices don’t go up, what happens? The system unravels. If
            dollars gain value sitting in your pocket you sit on your
            dollars, especially if you’re a bank.

        And the long periods of stable prices and economic growth in the
        19th century were impossible?

        The reason not to sit on your dollars in a world of stable
        prices is that the real interest rate is positive, so you make
        more money lending them out.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465322>
      *
        baconbacon says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:21 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466293>
        ~new~

            People are too happy to sit on their cash

        How did people make said cash? These arguments are always
        ciruclar “people have plenty of money, and won’t spend most of
        it!” “How did they make that money?” “Someone else b ought goods
        and or services from them!”

        How do you get an economy with people able to earn more than
        enough money to cover all their needs and wants AND have an
        economy where people are sitting on big piles of cash?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465322>
58.
    Deiseach says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:11 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465327>
    ~new~

    /Would you rather graduate from a modern college, or graduate from a
    college more like the one your parents went to, plus get a check for
    $72,000?/

    They didn’t and I didn’t, though unlike my father I did not leave
    school at fourteen to start work and help support the family 🙂

        Or instead of slogging through the statistics, we can just ask
        the same question as before. Do you think the average poor or
        middle-class person would rather:

        a) Get modern health care
        b) Get the same amount of health care as their parents’
        generation, but with modern technology like ACE inhibitors, and
        also earn $8000 extra a year

    The big IF there is the “modern technology” and I don’t see any way
    around paying more for that. Maybe not at the same rates as the
    increases of today but certainly not at the same prices as “their
    parents’ generation”.

    And no, I don’t want the same amount of health care as my parents’
    generation, because that was “nothing”. My mother had a young
    brother who died in infancy of what, looking back at it from the
    space of thirty years, was probably leukaemia – but it was diagnosed
    merely as “failure to thrive” and even if it had been diagnosed
    correctly, there was nothing that could have been done. My mother
    also had two sisters who died in their 30s/40s leaving young
    families behind; I’m kind of shaky on the cause there because the
    only time I heard it discussed something about whooping cough was
    mentioned and that’s generally only fatal for babies. TB was the big
    killer
    <http://www.irishexaminer.com/ireland/health/the-silent-terror-that-consumed-so-many-128709.html>
    in Ireland at the time. Our local regional hospital started off as a
    TB sanitorium (the reason the late Dr Noel Browne
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No%C3%ABl_Browne> has iconic saintly
    status in Ireland is that he tackled the TB epidemic and reduced
    mortality rates by 90% so that TB is more or less a disease of the
    past).

    So no, I would *not* go back to my parents’ time in health care,
    even for an extra eight grand a year in my pocket.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Nornagest says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 7:07 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465757>
        ~new~

            The big IF there is the “modern technology” and I don’t see
            any way around paying more for that.

        Some new tech is, some isn’t. Fancy imaging work in particular
        looks like a completely new line item, but I doubt new drugs
        (which are most of what Scott’s talking about) are going to be
        much more expensive than old ones on average — synthesis might
        involve some complicated organic chemistry, but IIRC most of the
        real money goes into R&D and compliance. New surgical techniques
        are probably somewhere in between, depending on whether they
        involve e.g. robots and endoscopes.

        Of course, that “compliance” line is going to be a big deal — a
        few years ago I interviewed with a maker of medical electronics,
        and it quickly became clear that half the time or more of my job
        description would be crossing bureaucratic Ts and dotting
        bureaucratic Is. I didn’t take the job.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465327>
      *
        Cadie says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:46 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466309>
        ~new~

        Well, I WOULD prefer to have health care equivalent to what my
        parents would have had in, say, 1975, compared to today
        (assuming availability of medication that is now generic, which
        might be 25 years more modern than 1975.) But this is because
        most health care in the USA today is completely unaffordable to
        out-of-pocket payers. All I can get is prescriptions for some
        medications. If it can’t be diagnosed cheaply and treated with
        generic meds, I don’t get any treatment at all.

        Like, yes, severe pneumonia would be more likely to kill a rich
        person or someone who qualifies for health care assistance in
        1975 than 2017. But it’s more likely to kill those of us without
        a lot of money or health care assistance in 2017, because we
        don’t have enough money to treat it beyond possibly a low-cost
        generic antibiotic and going to bed early. IVs, hospital stays,
        etc. are completely out of the question. Older-style, cheap care
        would improve the options that we can realistically access.

        Not only that, but for a lot of poor people, and extra $8000 (or
        $6000-ish, given the extra costs of having somewhat improved
        meds and devices available) decreases their need for health care
        by improving nutrition and safety and keeping them from working
        themselves to exhaustion. I know people who work three jobs to
        survive (not all full-time of course, usually 1 full time and 2
        part time). I have one full-time and one part-time myself, which
        isn’t ideal but stinks much less than working three. $6000-$8000
        would enable those with multiple jobs to eliminate one of the
        part-time jobs, or turn one of two full-time jobs into a
        part-time job, reducing the stress and fatigue that aggravate
        health problems.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465327>
59.
    Ilya Shpitser says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:25 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465333>
    ~new~

    I can confirm that the cost breakdown of University has a lot to do
    with “student life” stuff. Students might not, if asked point blank,
    prefer this to 1975 college, but the point is moot because
    Universities are locked into a competition with their peers, and
    happening student life is very visible and a good recruitment tool.

    —

    I worry that if you see this type of cost increase in a lot of
    disparate areas it might have to do with old intractable problems
    like the principal agent problem (although I might be a bit like
    Grandpa Simpson and see the principal agent problem around every
    corner). In other words, the mechanism for cost increase is broadly
    that we ‘conjure up’ entities to do various tasks for us in a modern
    civilization and those entities start to self-preserve and expand,
    with associated cost increases. And nothing really ever stops them,
    because they explicitly expend resources to justify this, every
    time. The problem with this explanation is why do the graphs look
    like this _now_ and not previously?

    Or perhaps this is related to some sort of “society physics” type of
    law where the only equilibrium is a large mass of people living on
    the edge of starvation with a small group of hyper-rich elites — and
    all moves are moves towards this equilibrium unless explicitly
    stopped. The problem with this explanation is we need to posit
    situations where this trend gets reversed (otherwise we would
    already be at equilibrium).

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        FullMeta_Rationalist says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:02 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465587>
        ~new~

        Re: society physics.

        What does SSC think of The Refragmentation
        <http://paulgraham.com/re.html> by pg?

        tldr Inequality is the logical conclusion of technological
        progress. Except WWII begot the Hansonian Dream-Time
        <http://www.overcomingbias.com/2009/09/this-is-the-dream-time.html>.


        ps Dream-Time is an old classic from 2009. But Both Plague & War
        Cut Capital Share? <Plague & War Cut Capital Share?> which
        Hanson posted yesterday also seems relevant, though I haven’t
        read it yet.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465333>
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:32 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465700>
        ~new~

            The problem with this explanation is why do the graphs look
            like this _now_ and not previously?

        One theory I would put forward is that modern communications
        have made increased centralization (and therefore more powerful
        agents) much more feasible than it was 50 or 100 years ago.
        Large, bureaucratic national agents are much more opaque and
        less accountable to their principals than smaller, local agents.
        So while principal-agent has always been a problem, the scope to
        which the problem can expand is exponentially higher due to
        technological progress.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465333>
      *
        Sniffnoy says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:32 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465730>
        ~new~

            I can confirm that the cost breakdown of University has a
            lot to do with “student life” stuff. Students might not, if
            asked point blank, prefer this to 1975 college, but the
            point is moot because Universities are locked into a
            competition with their peers, and happening student life is
            very visible and a good recruitment tool.

        So a sort of exploiting of consumer irrationality then? What
        causes someone to pay for college, is different from what they
        actually want out of it? Do we see this sort of phenomenon
        elsewhere, where costs are going up due to costly spending on
        what is effectively just functioning as advertising?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465333>
      *
        talldave2 says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:14 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466284>
        ~new~

        Empirically false, the “hyper-rich elites” are not stealing
        resources, they are creating them — e.g. Mark Zuckerberg didn’t
        make anyone poorer when he became a billionaire by inventing
        Facebook, and nearly all gains are eventually captured by
        consumers, the natural and inevitable result of consumers
        constantly seeking better value propositions in free markets.

        The exceptions to this process generally must involve rents and
        coercion, because rational actors don’t voluntarily make trades
        that leave them worse off.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465333>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:33 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466299>
            ~new~

            I like that you started a comment with “empirically false”
            that was actually just an attempt to relabel the original
            claim in accord with a different political stance.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466284>
              +
                talldave2 says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 4:29 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466327>
                ~new~

                No, it’s really empirically false — there are no
                examples of any “type of law where the only equilibrium
                is a large mass of people living on the edge of
                starvation with a small group of hyper-rich elites.”
                It’s never happened and can’t with free markets for the
                reasons I noted (hyper-riches come from expanding
                markets, and consumers don’t choose to make themselves
                worse off).

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466299>
          o
            Ilya Shpitser says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 4:26 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466324>
            ~new~

            Did you read what I wrote? Where did I mention theft? I
            meant an equilibrium of resource distribution.

            Humans are not rational actors (actually this blog is to
            some extent a spinoff from a community that tries to think
            about cognitive biases). Humans make trades that leave them
            worse off constantly, for a variety of reasons (soft
            coercion, stupidity, finite horizon issues, culture, etc.)

            —

            If you are empirically minded, this post’s original question
            is a good one to ponder (since it relates to something we
            are actually observing). Another question it might be worth
            pondering is why CEO compensation in the US has been
            behaving in the way we have been observing since the 1980s.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466284>
              +
                talldave2 says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 4:39 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466332>
                ~new~

                The hyper-rich elites would have be stealing their
                hyper-riches if they didn’t make people better off in
                voluntary exchange, and if they did make them better off
                it’s hard to see how the masses could be left starving.

                Whether humans are perfectly or even barely rational
                doesn’t matter in economic terms, either way they are
                generally trying to maximize utility. You or I might not
                think it’s rational for LeBron James’ ability to play a
                child’s game of ball-in-hoop to be valued in excess of a
                billion dollars, but others disagree. We might think
                it’s fairer to give that money to someone else, or that
                people would be better off spending money on something
                else, but good luck convincing his fans of that. Utility
                lies in the eye of the beholder.

                CEO compensation is mainly a function of their potential
                effect on the value of the company (and applicable laws
                regarding compensation). Again, you might think it’s
                irrational, but explain that to the investors paying
                them — or better yet start or invest in your own
                CEO-privation companies and triumph over all those
                inefficient companies paying their CEOs too much.

                A more interesting question is why so many of the
                richest people in the world are now entertainers and
                computer programmers.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466324>
                  #
                    Ilya Shpitser says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 5:16 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466343>
                    ~new~

                    You read a lot of Rand, then?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466332>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 5:29 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466347>
                    ~new~

                    Many people in this thread have differing political
                    or methodological frameworks, but are using them to
                    make isolated concrete points that other people can
                    agree or disagree with. But you are making sweeping
                    claims we are apparently supposed to take on faith.
                    I can think of no way to explain my disagreement
                    without getting into a Big Conversation that I, as
                    yet, have no reason to believe you would be able to
                    help me with. So I’ll just second the sentiment of
                    Ilya’s comment about your faith.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466332>
                  #
                    talldave2 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 10:27 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466643>
                    ~new~

                    I read a lot of Friedman, Hayek and Feynman,
                    probably the most important thinkers of the latter
                    half of the twentieth century.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466332>
                  #
                    talldave2 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 10:32 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466648>
                    ~new~

                    Jack, I gave some concrete examples in support my
                    sweeping points, and received none in response. You
                    and Ilya seem to be making the faith-based arguments
                    here, since there are not in fact a lot of examples
                    of hyper-rich elites who didn’t make a lot of other
                    people better off, nor has any plausible mechanism
                    been advanced as to how this might happen.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466332>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 3:27 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466860>
                    ~new~

                    The issue is in the framing. Here are some
                    contentious framings you have employed: 1) you
                    characterized the inequality Ilya Shpitser
                    hypothesized about as stealing; 2) you defined
                    creating and taking resources as exclusive
                    categories; 3) you defined theft and making people
                    better off in voluntary exchanges as exclusive
                    categories; 4) you characterised [something? actual
                    markets? most markets?] as free markets; 5) you
                    wrote off an above claim about bounded rationality
                    by characterizing people as utility-maximizers who
                    “therefore” tend to only make decisions that
                    increase their subjective utility; 6) you have
                    characterised what governments do as coercion in
                    some sense that most interactions are not (this
                    charcterisation is more from other threads here);
                    and, 7) you have throughout taken the individual as
                    the unit of analysis. My issue is not that any of
                    these framings are “wrong”, just that they all
                    assume so much and lead in the same direction. So I
                    feel like to have a conversation with you about
                    these issues we’d have to drill all the way down to
                    discussing the terms of the discussion, the effects
                    those terms have and why we would use some framings
                    and not others.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466332>
              +
                Douglas Knight says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 6:14 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466353>
                ~new~

                CEOs are a terrible example, both because their income
                is negligible, both as a proportion of GDP and a
                proportion of their company’s income; and because their
                income growth is quite explicable as a function of
                increasing company size. A much better example would be
                the finance sector, which is a much larger portion of
                GDP today than in 1970.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466324>
                  #
                    Ilya Shpitser says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:23 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466373>
                    ~new~

                    Why CEOs and not everyone else?

                    There were large companies in the past, why did CEO
                    compensation spike in the last 20 years, say?

                    Why did CEO compensation spike even in
                    moderate-sized companies?

                    —

                    I certainly agree there are much larger questions
                    here than CEOs specifically. But it would be useful
                    to have good models for why some folks can
                    successfully coordinate to outpace: company
                    valuation, compensation of others, etc. when arguing
                    for their own compensation.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466353>
                  #
                    talldave2 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 10:40 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466660>
                    ~new~

                    CEO pay is much higher because the GDP produced by
                    the 1000 largest companies is much larger than in
                    the past, but they still only have 1000 CEOs. The
                    definition of “medium-sized” could vary, but the
                    same is true for the top 10,000.

                    Strictly speaking most CEOs actually don’t make very
                    much, because there are vastly more CEOs of small
                    LLCs than of large C corps.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466353>
60.
    entirelyuseless <https://entirelyuseless.wordpress.com/> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:26 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465334>
    ~new~

    I don’t think there any simple explanations, or any simple
    solutions. In other words, these effects have multiple causes, and
    there is no easy way to fix things.

    On the other hand, it is not difficult to see contributing factors,
    and suggest moves that, if made, would reduce costs. It is just that
    we are unwilling to make those moves, possibly for good reasons.

    Consider health care and education, where this effect is plausibly
    the strongest.

    Health care: suppose health insurance was permanently banned. Within
    a very short time, healthcare costs would go dramatically down. This
    is because no one would get paid except sums of money that people
    actually have. So they would be forced to set prices at a level that
    people could pay, which is far lower than the sums that actually get
    paid by insurance. So there you have an intervention which would
    reduce costs, but no one is willing to make that intervention,
    plausibly for very good reasons.

    The nature of that intervention suggests one of the contributing
    factors to the problem. Insurance appears to have the ability to pay
    an unlimited sum, and people appear to have an unlimited amount of
    desire for healthcare. Given such a situation, supply and demand
    would lead to an unlimited price. Of course this effect is limited
    in reality because both are false: insurance can pay more, but not
    an unlimited sum, and people’s desire for healthcare is not really
    unlimited. But these things are approximately true at least to the
    extent that as society gets richer [i.e. the one who is actually
    paying rather than the sick person], healthcare costs will rise for
    these reasons.

    The same arguments can be made in the case of education, with the
    proposed intervention being “permanently ban student loans.”

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
61.
    James Brown says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:34 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465340>
    ~new~

    Organizations also often do in-house software
    development/maintenance/support, which we didn’t need to do before,
    is becoming more popular, and can cost absurd amounts of money.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
62.
    Jon S says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:36 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465341>
    ~new~

    Excellent discussion. Many of the proposed explanations in the
    comments seem like plausible factors; however, much of that
    discussion doesn’t address why those factors would be unique to the US.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
63.
    Murphy says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:42 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465345>
    ~new~

    To me… to me it sort of makes intuitive sense.
    It feels like the natural way of complex systems.

    I’ve worked in small, medium and large companies/organizations and
    young/old organizations/departments.

    And there’s a pattern. It’s a Molochian in that most of the people
    involved can see the problems around them and there’s logical
    reasons for each contributing thing but together they become a set
    of concrete shoes for the organisation and there’s no easy solution.

    Many programmers know what it’s like with big complex old systems.

    In a group with a few people writing new code vast amounts of work
    per person can get done in extremely short time-spans.

    In a big old company things move at a glacial pace. If it’s a good
    company though they at least move and get there eventually.

    In the latter you find yourself tied into mostly pointless meetings,
    anything of substance you need to do ends up needing to be run by 20
    different people.

    Technology doesn’t help with this. It can help short term but mostly
    technology merely /facilitates/ this.

    There’s an accompanying growth of paperwork. This isn’t the mean old
    government or regulation(at least not always). In a private firm
    working for private firms there were often massive sets of required
    paperwork.
    Sometimes some of this paperwork becomes automated. Forms you
    previously needed to fill out get automatically filled in by some
    program so you don’t need to do it.

    But I said before, technology doesn’t actually help. It just allows
    you to ignore the problem for longer.

    And each individual item is there for what feels like a good reason.
    Once someone killed someone and the decision afterwards was to add
    item 101 to the checklist to make sure there was nobody in the
    dangerous zone at that step. If you remove it it’s entirely
    foreseeable that you could end up in court with someone saying “and
    the safety measure that could have saved little billies life was
    removed to save a few pennies and seconds by you!”

    Technology does not help though because this has always been a
    problem that expands to meet the capabilities of the system, until
    it forces people to deal with it. Automate 10K pieces of paperwork
    and it just means the system can now cope with 10K pieces plus
    whatever else you can cope with before someone needs to take the hit
    and change things.

    It’s not just safety measures, it’s not just liability.

    It’s everything. If technology allows you to keep fulfilling a
    legacy requirement to talk to some other system then you will. If
    technology takes up some of the strain it allows more load to be
    placed on the system.

    So it’s not surprising to me that those schools cope better. Their
    employees are probably happier too since they don’t spend their time
    on what amounts to system maintenance. Give it 40 years though and
    they’ll probably look a lot like the other schools unless you’ve got
    some very unusual individuals in charge.

    As far as I can tell no organization or organization type is immune
    to the phenomenon.
    Some are a little more resistant. organizations which explicitly
    resist complexity and making their systems more complex at every
    step: the decay is slowed but not halted.

    it’s also a tad cancerous. Once you have 10K policies and have
    people who’s jobs are to write policies and policies on dealing with
    policies the additional cost of 1 new one is very small and there’s
    always a “good reason”.

    It’s at every level, it’s not just paperwork, it’s also in the
    interactions between employees, it’s in the interactions with clients.

    To be clear:
    Cutting out just one area gains you very little. Cut out every
    government regulation and you’ll just find yourself in the same
    place in 10 years.

    It’s not just regulations, it’s also organizational memory and
    organizational trauma in the form of policies to deal with things
    which have harmed the organization in the past.

    Add to that: in a city like new york for a big project you have to
    interact with thousands of legacy systems of various sizes to some
    degree.

    Some very very old institutions have structures to deal with it,
    often they take the form of modularity. Organization structures that
    allow the creation and destruction of entire departments or other
    modules as a whole, wiping the slate clean.

    The principles of system design and system architecture applies to
    everything, not just software.

    The US has been rich with strong institutions for a long time.
    Comparative newcomers don’t need to deal with hundreds of years of
    legacy systems in countries where everything was burned to the
    ground 50 years ago.

    Libertarianism does not solve the problem, it just kicks the can
    down the road a little unless there’s massive churn of every system
    and meta-system as well with the incentives aligning perfectly.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Marklouis says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:12 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465505>
        ~new~

        The difference is that if you grow increasingly inefficient in
        the private sector, someone else will eventually come along and
        supply a superior value proposition. There are limits to how
        much bloat can accumulate. There is no such mechanism to
        self-correct the areas Scott is discussing.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465345>
          o
            Murphy says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 6:51 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466187>
            ~new~

            It allows an organisation to survive a little bit longer but
            a multi billion dollar multinational can survive a great
            deal of it and can be weighed down massively while still
            having the clout to stamp on competitors.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465505>
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:36 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465705>
        ~new~

        Vote Reapers <http://masseffect.wikia.com/wiki/Reaper> 2020!
        It’s the responsible choice to avoid sclerotization!

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465345>
64.
    grothor says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:51 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465352>
    ~new~

    I work in a physics lab, and we use a lot of scientific equipment.
    Scientific equipment is expensive. Sometimes, this is because it is
    expensive to make, but sometimes, it’s just because people are used
    to paying a lot of money for it, and are suspicious when it is too
    cheap.

    I recently started using a $25 consumer electronic device in place
    of something that would normally be a $2000 piece of specialized
    equipment. It occurred to me that I could start making a version of
    the $25 device, with some minor tweaks to make it more user friendly
    for technical work, and charge as much as I want, so long as it’s
    cheaper than $2000, especially because the sort of lab that would
    want it would need to have a big budget in order to operate at all.
    Actually, I couldn’t sell it for however much I want, because if I
    tried to sell it for $25, nobody would buy it because they wouldn’t
    think it was “real” scientific equipment. I’m not even sure how much
    would be enough. $200? $500?

    I don’t know if this can account for the $700 bag of saline or not.
    I imagine hospitals employing people who purchase saline, and I
    don’t imagine these people being as susceptible to the
    real-medical-equipment-is-expensive bias as a graduate student in a
    physics lab, but I can imagine there being a strong enough desire to
    avoid lawsuits to bias someone toward the option that seems more
    legitimate, and appearing legitimate usually involves price.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 5:30 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465699>
        ~new~

        If someone tried to sell “made in Thailand costs 50c” bags of
        saline to a hospital, I wouldn’t be surprised that suspicions
        about quality control would be triggered, but you would need one
        heck of a “more expensive is better” mindset to pay $700 for a
        bag of saline. I could see paying $10, I could even see bumping
        it up to $50 for extra-special guaranteed not to trigger any
        weird allergies
        <http://answers.google.com/answers/threadview?id=594792> saline,
        but not that kind of money. There /has/ to be a reason behind
        that price, if it was a genuine one.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465352>
          o
            Loquat says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:51 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465710>
            ~new~

            As I understand it, in the US our hospitals have the
            following problems: (1) as Scott mentions, people who can’t
            pay show up with emergencies and it’s illegal to deny them
            care, and (2) most insurance companies aggressively
            negotiate down the prices of the services they cover, though
            some are more aggressive about it than others, particularly
            Medicare and Medicaid. So the hospital may only pay $1 per
            bag of saline to its supplier, and you’d think $5 or so
            would be a reasonable price to just charge everyone, but if
            they bill the patient $700 then they’ll get various
            insurance companies paying $2-$50 or more per bag and the
            occasional non-insured person who isn’t judgement-proof like
            Scott’s “frequent flyers” and winds up having to pay more or
            less the full $700. And this is what they feel like they
            have to do to make ends meet.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465699>
              +
                grothor says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:31 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465815>
                ~new~

                Yes, I suppose distrust of low-cost medical supplies can
                only explain how much the hospital pays a supplier, not
                how much patients pay the hospital. It sounds like “IV
                therapy” is seen as a convenient place to charge
                patients or their insurance company to offset other
                costs to the hospital.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465710>
65.
    wysinwygymmv says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:54 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465353>
    ~new~

    I haven’t gone through all the comments yet, but how hard would it
    really be to look at a bunch of budgets from public schools ranging
    from like 1965 to the present and actually just physically look at
    where the money used to go and where it goes now? Has anyone does
    this research? It seems like a really obvious first step.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:23 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465376>
        ~new~

        That’s been done – the best/easiest data source is here:
        Employment (50% of staff are non-teachers)
        https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_213.10.asp
        Costs:
        https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_236.10.asp

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465353>
          o
            wysinwygymmv says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 10:38 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465391>
            ~new~

            Thanks, this is great!

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465376>
66.
    David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:56 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465356>
    ~new~

    My thoughts on this, as pasted (with minimal edits) from a Medium
    post I just wrote;
    https://medium.com/@davidmanheim/chasing-superior-good-syndrome-vs-baumols-or-scott-s-cost-disease-40327ae87b45

    I think Scott misses an important dynamic that I’d like to lay out.

    Above, he lists of eight potential answers, each of which he partly
    dismisses. Cost increases are really happening, and markets mostly
    work, so it’s not simply a market failure. Government inefficiency
    and overregulation doesn’t really explain large parts of the
    problem, nor do fear of lawsuits. Risk tolerance has decreased, but
    that seems not to have been the sole issue. Cost shirking by some
    people might increase costs a bit, but that isn’t the whole picture.
    Finally, not in the list explicitly, but implicitly explored when
    Scott refers to “politics,” is Moloch.

    I think it’s a bit strange to end the long list of partial answers,
    which plausibly explain the vast majority of the issue with “What’s
    happening? I don’t know and I find it really scary.” But I think
    there is another dynamic that’s being ignored — and I would be
    surprised if an economist ignored it, but I’ll blame Scott’s
    eclectic ad-hoc education for why he doesn’t discuss the elephant in
    the room — Superior goods.

    *Superior Goods*

    For those who don’t remember their Economics classes, imagine a guy
    who makes $40,000/year and eats chicken for dinner 3 nights a week.
    He gets a huge 50% raise, to $60,000/year, and suddenly has extra
    money to spend — his disposable income probably tripled or
    quadrupled. Before the hedonic treadmill kicks in, and he decides to
    waste all the money on higher rent and nicer cars, he changes his
    diet. But he won’t start eating chicken 10 times a week — he’ll
    start eating steak. When people get more money, they replace cheap
    “inferior” goods with expensive “superior” goods. And steak is a
    superior good.

    But how many times a week will people eat steak? Two? Five?
    Americans as a whole got really rich in the 1940s and 1950s, and
    needed someplace to start spending their newfound wealth. What do
    people spend extra money on? Entertainment is now pretty cheap, and
    there are only so many nights a week you see a movie, and only so
    many $20/month MMORPGs you’re going to pay for. You aren’t going to
    pay 5 times as much for a slightly better video game or movie — and
    although you might pay double for 3D-Imax, there’s not much room for
    growth in that 5%.
    The Atlantic had a piece on this several years ago;
    https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2012/04/how-america-spends-money-100-years-in-the-life-of-the-family-budget/255475/

    Food, including rising steak consumption, decreased to a negligible
    part of people’s budgets, as housing started rising. The other big
    change the article discusses is that after 1950 or so, everyone got
    cars, and commuted from their more expensive suburban houses — which
    is effectively an implicit increase in housing cost.

    And at some point, bigger houses and nicer cars begin to saturate; a
    Tesla is nicer than my Hyundai, and I’d love one, but not enough to
    upgrade for 3x the cost. I know how much better a Tesla is — I’ve
    seen them.

    *Limitless Demand, Invisible Supply*

    There are only a few things that we have a limitless demand for, but
    very limited ability to judge the impact of our spending. What are they?

    I think this is one big missing piece of the puzzle; in both
    healthcare and education, we want improvements, and they are worth a
    ton, but we can’t figure out how much the marginal spending improves
    things. So we pour money into these sectors.

    Scott thinks this means that teachers’ and doctors’ wages should
    rise, but they don’t. I think it’s obvious why; they supply isn’t
    very limited. And the marginal impact of two teachers versus one, or
    a team of doctors versus one, isn’t huge. (Class size matters, but
    we have tons of teachers — with no shortage in sight, there is no
    price pressure.)

    What sucks up the increased money? Dollars, both public and private,
    chasing hard to find benefits.

    I’d spend money to improve my health, both mental and physical, but
    how? Extra medical diagnostics to catch problems, pricier but
    marginally more effective drugs, chiropractors, probably useless
    supplements — all are exploding in popularity. How much do they
    improve health? I don’t really know — not much, but I’d probably try
    something if it might be useful.

    I’m spending a ton of money on preschool for my kids. Why? Because
    it helps, according to the studies. How much better is the
    $15,000/year daycare versus the $8,000 a year program a friend of
    mine runs in her house? Unclear, but I’m certainly not the only one
    spending big bucks. Why spend less, if education is the most
    superior good around?

    How much better is Harvard than a subsidized in-state school, or
    four years of that school versus 2 years of cheap community college
    before transferring in? The studies seem to suggest that most of the
    benefit is really because the kids who get into the better schools.
    And Scott knows that this is happening. (Linking to previous posts
    here.)

    We pour money into schools and medicine in order to improve things,
    but where does the money go? Into efforts to improve things, of
    course. But I’ve argued at length before that bureaucracy is bad at
    incentivizing things, especially when goals are unclear. So the
    money goes to sinkholes like more bureaucrats and clever
    manipulation of the metrics that are used to allocate the money.

    As long as we’re incentivized to improve things that we’re unsure
    how to improve, the incentives to pour money into them unwisely will
    continue, and costs will rise. That’s not the entire answer, but
    it’s a central dynamic that leads to many of the things Scott is
    talking about — so hopefully that reduces Scott’s fears a bit.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        tmk says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:14 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465372>
        ~new~

        I broadly agree.
        * People have more money now
        * They are going to spend it
        * For most things, diminishing returns kick in very quickly.
        Buying a fancier computer has zero benefit for most people. Even
        the most dedicated gamer only has so much time. Buying $400,000
        cars are largely a waste.

        Housing, education and health case are some of the few things
        where you can actually buy something better. In comfort even
        their primary function stays the same.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465356>
          o
            citizencokane <http://citizencokane.wordpress.com> says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:20 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465558>
            ~new~

            I don’t buy it. I would expect to see some combination of
            superior/more costly housing, education, etc., and some
            increased leisure. And yet, we see no increased leisure at
            all. Do people just not value leisure at all?

            Personally, I’ve noticed that the biggest bottleneck in my
            life is not money, but time. You couldn’t get me to spend
            more money even if you asked me to because I wouldn’t have
            the time to do it. I’m busy playing Rimworld and commenting
            on the Internet. If someone offered me more hours at work,
            I’d say, “What for?” What do I need more money for?

            The thing is, there is one thing that it is impossible for
            everyone to do: be a rentier. Imagine that everyone spent
            frugally enough to save up what today would be considered a
            sustainable endowment: perhaps $1 million. Then imagine that
            everyone tried to live off the interest. My guess is that
            interest rates would collapse due to the overabundance of
            money capital (with everyone trying to save), and people
            would not be able to live off the interest no matter how
            large their savings got. After all, if nobody is working for
            a living, then how is everything going to be produced?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465372>
              +
                David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 4:34 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465661>
                ~new~

                But leisure time HAS shot up (That’s how you have time
                to play Rimworld and comment here)

                https://www.bostonfed.org/-/media/Documents/Workingpapers/PDF/wp0602.pdf

                “We document that a dramatic increase in leisure time
                lies behind the relatively stable number of market hours
                worked (per working‐age adult) between 1965 and 2003.
                Specifically, we document that leisure for men increased
                by 6‒8 hours per week (driven by a decline in market
                work hours) and for women by 4‒8 hours per week (driven
                by a decline in home production work hours).”

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465558>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 6:00 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465714>
                    ~new~

                    I’d be curious to know how well this correlates with
                    declining birth rates. From my own observation, the
                    largest predictor of leisure time among adults my
                    age (mid-30s) is whether or not they have children.
                    Those of us DINKs have a lot of money and time to
                    play with that traditional families do not.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465661>
              +
                psmith says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 4:43 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465668>
                ~new~

                    Imagine that everyone spent frugally enough to save
                    up what today would be considered a sustainable
                    endowment: perhaps $1 million. Then imagine that
                    everyone tried to live off the interest.

                Labor supply goes down –> wages go up –> marginal
                retirees enter the labor market –> market clears

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465558>
                  #
                    Deiseach says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 5:25 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465694>
                    ~new~

                    More like labour supply goes down -> immigrants
                    (legal or illegal) from poorer countries imported to
                    do the work -> wages stay at same levels or even
                    decrease

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465668>
      *
        David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:00 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465458>
        ~new~

        Nathan Taylor (of the praxtime.com blog ?) was retweeted by
        Robin Hanson, and has a different argument related to a paper of
        Hanson’s, which is related to my argument, and I also liked –
        Thread;
        https://twitter.com/ntaylor963/status/830052771575377920
        “FWIW, I suspect cost disease worst in most important areas of
        life precisely *because* we want to show we care about them. A
        bitter irony.”
        “Here’s the @robinhanson paper on healthcare not about health,
        but showing we care.
        http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/showcare.pdf ”
        “Here’s a good write up of this health argument. You can see why
        also can apply to education, etc.
        https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-08-23/health-care-is-a-business-not-a-right
        “

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465356>
          o
            Cerebral Paul Z. says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465482>
            ~new~

            I’d say that “cost disease” is associated with the most
            important areas of life because the phrase suggests the
            existence of a /problem/, not just a neutral fact about the
            market. When the same dynamic occurs in a market that people
            don’t care so much about– for example, domestic servants a
            century ago– everyone shrugs and substitutes away from the
            good or service that’s getting more expensive. The articles
            bemoaning “cost disease” get written about things we don’t
            want to see people substituting away from.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465458>
67.
    JShots says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:57 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465357>
    ~new~

    I’m a healthcare actuary, and I have read a lot of theories/evidence
    about why healthcare costs trend at a much higher rate than
    inflation. It would take too long to get into all that, but I did
    want to point out a logical argument about why it’s difficult to
    compare increased consumption of healthcare services to trends in
    mortality/life expectancy. A pretty large majority of healthcare
    services are consumed by a fraction of the population. I believe a
    quarter of all expenses can be attributed to 1% of the population
    (from a Kaiser report I read a while back). I don’t have the exact
    figures, so I’ll make up an example and extrapolate (or don’t, think
    of the following argument in terms of the first set of figures). Say
    10% of population consumes 75% of services. You may be able to
    increase the lifespan of these particularly sick individuals (where
    as in the past, technology would not allowed us to help them and
    they would just die), but overall, you’re not going to see a huge
    impact on the total population. I would venture to say that a
    disproportionate share of the high medical cost trends are incurred
    in attempts at helping these particularly sick people. Because we
    have insurance, all of this experience (healthcare expenses) is
    pooled and spread to everyone else when the insurance companies
    develop premiums for the plans. I would argue that it NEEDS to be
    this way in some shape or form, obviously we shouldn’t just abandon
    those that are sick, but the “healthy” consumers are really starting
    to feel the brunt of this conundrum, and it’s understandable that
    many are fed up with these high costs.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Douglas Knight says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:15 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465472>
        ~new~

        If you wanted to make medical spending lower, heroic medicine is
        a tempting target, but the question isn’t why medical spending
        is so high. The questions are (1) why is it twice as high in
        America as Europe; and (2) why do both places see such rapid
        increases in price?

        For this to answer to the first question, there would have to be
        more heroic medicine in America than Europe. I don’t believe
        this. Medical care is pretty much identical, with every
        individual component costing twice as much in America. Even if
        it were true, that’s just a factor of 2. Much scarier is the
        rapid increase with time. I find it plausible that heroic
        medicine is increasing with time, but nowhere near fast enough
        to drive the trend. And maybe it hasn’t increased
        proportionately at all. Lewis Thomas <https://archive.is/F4NhI>
        wrote in the 70s about the previous half-century.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465357>
          o
            Deiseach says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:14 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465688>
            ~new~

            I wonder if it is that American hospital pricing systems are
            crazy. I was noodling around on an American hospital site
            and clicked on “how to pay your bill” and was astounded that
            the hospital was saying “yeah, we’ll charge you for the stay
            and the procedure, but that’s not the whole of it – other
            bills will be charged separately, e.g. if you had to have
            x-rays the radiologist will charge, the surgeon will charge,
            the anaesthesist etc etc etc”.

            To me that seems like walking into a shop and when you go to
            pay, you’re told “yeah, we’ll charge you for the goods but
            as well you have to pay separate bills from the cleaners who
            keep the premises in good order, the delivery drivers who
            truck the goods to our store, the painters and decorators
            who make it look so nice…”

            Isn’t there any way of “here’s the rate for the operation
            and it’s all added into one bill so at least there aren’t
            sixteen different bills from different entities”? That seems
            to me to drive up your costs if everyone involved is “well,
            the insurance is paying for it anyway, bung another zero on
            the end!”

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465472>
              +
                Loquat says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:01 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465715>
                ~new~

                For various reasons, over here specialists like
                surgeons, radiologists, etc, tend to be independent
                contractors rather than employees of the hospital. Not
                only does this result in the billing issue you describe,
                it also creates the issue of the hospital taking your
                insurance but the specialist not. Furthermore, if a
                hospital has, say, multiple anaesthetists who work there
                and some of them take your insurance but some don’t,
                there’s often no way to guarantee that you get one of
                the ones who does, even if you’re scheduling your
                procedure well in advance.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465688>
                  #
                    Corey says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 8:20 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466070>
                    ~new~

                    And part of the reason this is a problem: in
                    addition to insurers paying a higher percentage for
                    “in-network” providers, the real value is that
                    in-network providers have price controls: they will
                    charge only what the insurer allows, and write off
                    the rest. The difference between charge-master and
                    network rates can be a factor of 5 or more; when
                    your insurance says it pays 50% of out-of-network,
                    this may only be 10% if the provider bills at 5x the
                    network rate.

                    There is no legal nor logical limit to what a
                    provider can bill you in the absence of a network
                    contract. Most markets don’t need such price
                    controls, but when you have price opacity and all
                    the other market failures of healthcare…

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465715>
              +
                Incurian says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:35 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465733>
                ~new~

                This seems relevant:
                http://time.com/4649914/why-the-doctor-takes-only-cash/

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465688>
              +
                Synonym Seven says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 9:37 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465906>
                ~new~

                    To me that seems like walking into a shop and when
                    you go to pay, you’re told “yeah, we’ll charge you
                    for the goods but as well you have to pay separate
                    bills from the cleaners who keep the premises in
                    good order, the delivery drivers who truck the goods
                    to our store, the painters and decorators who make
                    it look so nice…”

                No, it really isn’t.

                Everyone who shops at that store makes use of the
                functional premises, the goods brought in by truck, and
                the pretty storefront. They’re common goods and can be
                easily assimilated into the markup. The non-common goods
                (i.e. the customer who asks the staff person to get out
                the ladder to reach an object on the top shelf vs. the
                customer who grabs their own item) add such a negligible
                cost that nobody minds subsidizing it.

                Not everyone who goes into a hospital benefits from the
                radiologist or the oncologist. And because these things
                are /expensive/, it’s not something that can easily be
                translated to a flat-rate markup.

                A better analogy would be an amusement park that doesn’t
                have a flat-entry fee, and just bills you on exit. Ride
                the phlebotomy rollercoaster, that’s $/x/. Go into the
                haunted mansion of x-rays, that’s $/y/. Eat five
                penicillin snow-cones, that’s 5*$/z/. I think most of us
                can easily wrap our minds around such a concept.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465688>
                  #
                    Loquat says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 12:33 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465938>
                    ~new~

                    There’s a difference between making everyone pay for
                    the radiologist via flat-rate markup versus having
                    the radiologist’s fee included in the overall
                    hospital bill rather than being a totally separate
                    bill. The latter is what D’s complaining about, and
                    it’s part of what makes it hard for budget-minded
                    patients to shop around – many hospitals can’t even
                    tell you up front what they’d be likely to charge
                    for a given procedure themselves, and they certainly
                    can’t tell you what their independently-contracting
                    radiologist is likely to charge.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465906>
                  #
                    BBA says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 1:12 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465955>
                    ~new~

                        many hospitals can’t even tell you up front what
                        they’d be likely to charge for a given procedure
                        themselves

                    To expand on this: the hospital will have an
                    official price list, called the “charge master,” but
                    virtually nobody will actually pay it. You’re
                    expected to have the price negotiated down by your
                    insurance provider and even if it falls within the
                    deductible you’re still paying much less. And if you
                    have no coverage and can’t afford the full sticker
                    price, they will usually be willing to bargain it
                    down from something completely unreasonable to
                    something only partially unreasonable.

                    At the top hospitals in NYC the only people who pay
                    the sticker price are Saudi princes, which means the
                    hospitals set prices that only Saudi princes can afford.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465906>
                  #
                    JShots says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 11:00 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466216>
                    ~new~

                    I work with provider reimbursement contracts a lot,
                    and I have to say that the whole charge master
                    system has gotten a bit overly complicated…

                    But to BBA’s point, as a consumer, even if you don’t
                    have insurance, you still have some power to
                    negotiate rates with a provider on your own. I’ve
                    heard of people paying less for certain types of
                    services without insurance. Probably not at a large
                    hospital, but for physician or outpatient services
                    that are a bit more elective. Maybe a minor surgery,
                    or some routine services.

                    There are some consumer protections if you’re
                    willing to make the effort to discuss with the
                    provider exactly what services will occur and be
                    sure you are not over-charged, but I think most
                    people look at their bill and say WTF is a
                    HCPCS/CPT?? and just end up not bothering, haha.
                    There’s a quirky guy at my office I used to sit next
                    to and I overheard one of his phone calls with the
                    physicians office and through his persistence he
                    negotiated down his bill from like $1000 to $300,
                    just being armed with the right knowledge.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465906>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:03 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466278>
                    ~new~

                    Is there any reason one can’t separate the service
                    of bargaining with providers from the service of
                    paying for them? Are there firms that provide no
                    insurance at all but charge you a much lower price
                    in exchange for getting their customers the same
                    price an insurance company would get?

                    If not, are there reasons such firms cannot exist?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465906>
                  #
                    The Nybbler says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:48 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466313>
                    ~new~

                        Are there firms that provide no insurance at all
                        but charge you a much lower price in exchange
                        for getting their customers the same price an
                        insurance company would get?

                    Essentially yes; some companies self-fund their
                    health insurance, but it’s administered through a
                    regular insurance provider.

                    On the individual level, I’m unaware of this
                    existing for general medical, but I believe it
                    exists for vision, dental, and prescription drugs.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465906>
                  #
                    JShots says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 5:15 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466342>
                    ~new~

                    Yeah, I think it’s a problem. Provider contracts
                    cover a lot more than just reimbursement terms.
                    There are a lot of laws (particularly for HMOs) that
                    require companies to include all sorts of various
                    protections for consumer/payer/provider. I don’t
                    know for sure if these couldn’t be separated for
                    medical services, but I think the fact that it’s not
                    common probably answers that question. I do know
                    that it occurs for Dental and sometimes Rx, although
                    I think are much less common these days. They were
                    referred to as Dental or Rx “Discount Cards”. To
                    Nybbler’s post, yes, these are called Administrative
                    Services Only (ASO) companies. Although, I think
                    that some of the largest companies do self-fund and
                    administer their own health plans, but I think they
                    are still subject to the same laws as the insurers.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465906>
              +
                Corey says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:16 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466069>
                ~new~

                It’s not only that, the prices are also entirely opaque,
                for the hospital itself and all of the ancillary
                providers. Not just post-insurance, but pre-insurance.
                You literally cannot find out the prices before you’ve
                had the work done – no wonder the market is so
                dysfunctional. (Then post-billing there’s always some
                Calvinball regarding the charge-master rates vs. insurer
                caps vs. the amount they’re actually willing to settle
                for (if you can generate a plausible threat of
                bankruptcy, otherwise you have no leverage)).

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465688>
          o
            dumky2 says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 3:48 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465865>
            ~new~

            > Medical care is pretty much identical

            I’m not sure that’s true. Scott Atlas in his book and
            writings on healthcare suggests that there is indeed more
            heroic care in the US.
            Two salient differences: More in-vitro fertilization (and
            therefore more premature and twin/triplet births). More
            heroic cancer care.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465472>
          o
            JShots says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 10:46 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466213>
            ~new~

            Forgot to click the box to get notifications on my comment!
            To your point Douglas, I agree, but that wasn’t really what
            my initial post was targeting. Was just commenting on the
            complications of using medical expenses as a predictor for
            life expectancy. From my work experience and many things
            I’ve read, I know one of the biggest reasons for
            discrepancies in costs between U.S. and other places is the
            degree of medical waste. The company I work for actually has
            a tool that can take a medical claims data set and identify
            the degree of “waste” and determine the potential savings
            opportunities for providers. We over utilize services to a
            frightening degree, particularly when there’s no evidence
            that additional services will provide any meaningful
            benefit. But, I don’t think necessarily that medical
            malpractice suits directly drive the increase in costs, but
            more of a general paranoia that if we don’t do EVERYTHING
            possible to exactly identify the issue and treat, that
            something terrible might happen (when the vast majority of
            times, it won’t). Also, we still have many reimbursement
            systems that provide bad incentives for physicians/hospitals
            to over utilize.

            Another issue, which I was surprised to read about is just
            how awfully slow the U.S. has been to adopt electronic
            medical records. This has created some bloat in the system
            as well. Doctors spend more time on administrative duties
            and this results in worse care provided to patients.

            Also, it’s pretty obvious that companies (particularly Rx
            and D.M.E.) know they can use the U.S. market to subsidize
            the costs of providing at lower costs in foreign markets.
            Insurers already to something similar – they subsidize the
            lower reimbursements from Medicare/Medicaid by charging more
            in the Commercial markets.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465472>
              +
                as1018 says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 12:43 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466741>
                ~new~

                Electronic medical records have already been widely
                adopted. It is a blight on the medical landscape and a
                major frustration for many physicians.
                The electronics records often do not reflect how
                physicians work. I found that electronic records caused
                me to work more slowly. Everyone thinks that technology
                is always great and wonderful but much of the medical
                record technology is garbage.
                For example, one place I worked went to a new electronic
                scheduling system. The secretaries had to click through
                ten screens to make an appointment. The result was that
                they wrote the appointments in a schedule book the old
                fashioned way and entered them into the computer later.
                I did medical chart reviews for a while and it was clear
                that many physicians are just cutting and pasting
                visits, probably to get through work more quickly. Thus
                we end up with long lists of diseases per patient
                because, when you cut and paste, it is easy to just add
                a new diagnosis to the bottom of the list. However, this
                creates a massive amount of background noise. I am less
                efficient when I go to a chart and I have to wade
                through a list of every condition that person has ever
                had to find the critical information. We used to place
                the old information into a past medical history category
                but now it stays in the active list because of the way
                electronic records are set up.
                The problem is so bad that many clinics are going to
                medical scribes who follow physicians around and write
                down the details of the visit as the doctor meets with
                the patient. The physician can then review the note and
                sign off.
                When I was in training, we were taught how to do a
                patient summary, listing pertinent medical details, to
                send to a consultant. (I am old fashioned, I still did
                that until my recent retirement.) What I was receiving
                now-days would be tens to hundreds of pages of
                electronic records that were all virtually identical. I
                would have have to look through all of them because they
                were faxed to me and had no apparent organization. A
                huge waste of my time when trying to find a few
                pertinent details on a new patient.
                The other issue is the cost of electronic records. I
                have known several practices that had to close after
                spending money on electronic records. The cost in
                investing in the records ended up being more expensive
                than the original quote, the doctors saw fewer patients,
                and reimbursements did not increase to cover the costs.
                It destroyed their bottom line and they had to close.
                There is an ideal of having all medical records
                coordinated electronically but it doesn’t exist (except
                maybe at the VA). I spoke with one of the biggest
                integrated networks who was talking about how they were
                planning to coordinating their hospitals, doctor
                offices, laboratories and other facilities. They have
                been held up as an example of one of the most integrated
                systems but, on questioning, they have actually only
                integrated a few of the largest players in their system.
                They just laughed when I asked when they were going to
                meet their goal of being fully integrated.
                Well functioning affordable electronic medical records?
                Right now I place them in the category of unicorns and
                leprechauns.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466213>
                  #
                    Ilya Shpitser says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:53 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466744>
                    ~new~

                    This is a very valuable comment for me, thank you.

                    Are you a practicing physician (or nurse)?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
                  #
                    MathEpic says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:02 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466751>
                    ~new~

                    Thanks, and my condolences for this headache you
                    have to deal with.

                    If I might summarize, the medical community has had
                    an “upgrade” that:
                    1. Was originally presented as an improvement
                    2. Costs more to set up
                    3. Costs more to maintain
                    4. Takes more time to use

                    This fits in to the theory of what I have called
                    “quality accretion” in another post.

                    Honest question:
                    What forces and incentives are in place to prevent
                    you to going back to the old system?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
                  #
                    as1018 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:02 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466752>
                    ~new~

                    Ilya,
                    I am a family practice physician. I have been in
                    practice for about twenty years. I retired in the
                    last year and I am now earning a living through the
                    Internet and I have a small organic farm to provide
                    many of my food needs. I cannot describe how much
                    abuse I put up with from insurers, administrators,
                    and even patients (one patient even threatened to
                    kill me if I performed a physical exam and they
                    experienced any discomfort) and how happy I am to
                    now have a sane lifestyle. I cannot imagine ever
                    returning to the grind that is the daily practice of
                    medicine.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
                  #
                    as1018 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:12 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466763>
                    ~new~

                    I was a renegade for most of my practice and I did
                    not go electronic. But I had a cash based system and
                    low overhead costs. I chose this to make my life easier.
                    However, I sometimes filled in for physicians on
                    vacation who used other systems. Once they went to
                    electronic records and switched their systems over,
                    there is really no easy way to go back.
                    It is so expensive to implement an electronic record
                    that most places cannot afford to switch to a
                    different system if the one they have does not work
                    well. I know places that have spent $30,000 per
                    provider to implement electronic records. There are
                    probably some less expensive. Then there are monthly
                    costs to maintain the system.
                    The reason clinics have gone to these records has
                    been mandates from insurance companies and the
                    government. They both have placed decreased payment
                    penalties on practices that do not have electronic
                    records.
                    The latest has been a requirement for “meaningful
                    use” of electronic systems. The providers must show
                    that they are using the records often enough, in the
                    “correct” manner, and using electronics to
                    communicate with patients or the providers will have
                    their reimbursement docked. This has lead to all
                    sorts of predictable craziness and it especially
                    wounds small clinics and solo practitioners who
                    cannot afford the required electronics.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
                  #
                    Ilya Shpitser says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:12 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466764>
                    ~new~

                    Some context:

                    I am not a physician, I am a computer scientist (at
                    Hopkins), but I work in the healthcare space, and
                    think about EHR data (on the analysis end).

                    My colleagues and I are very interested in making
                    technology of the sort you are referring to actually
                    useful for folks in the trenches, and this sort of
                    feedback is very helpful. A lot of tech in general
                    is poorly thought out from HCI and design
                    viewpoints, and I think it’s particularly true in
                    medicine.

                    We will keep working on it!

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
                  #
                    as1018 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:21 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466775>
                    ~new~

                    Ilya,
                    One of the best things you could do would be to
                    involve physicians and nurses when designing the
                    systems.
                    Do usability studies frequently in the planning
                    process. I am a huge fan of usability studies in
                    every aspect of computer systems.
                    Also different types of practices need different
                    systems-something that is frequently missed. What
                    works for a small primary care clinic does not match
                    what is needed for a surgical or psychiatric
                    practice or even a large multi-physician practice.
                    It would be great to have more computer people
                    talking to the medical people on the front lines
                    early in the design process instead of trying to
                    modify the end product.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:40 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466829>
                    ~new~

                    I’ve had a somewhat similar experience with
                    electronic records in law, another field with a lot
                    of notes and a lot of potential profit for software
                    companies. I’ve also had the experience of finding
                    the old-fashioned way simpler and faster, though in
                    law there’s generally a reason for the ten screens
                    you have to click through. A lot of “being a good
                    lawyer” is learning what corners you can cut in
                    order to give your client the best value for their
                    dollar. There are some cadillac lawyers whose
                    clients just don’t care who get to go around all the
                    corners, though they’re outliers. But officially you
                    aren’t supposed to cut corners, and so software
                    products are designed with all the corners in place.
                    To many lawyers this makes them unwieldy. Or perhaps
                    to put this another way, the professional
                    regulations that used to be flexible have become
                    frozen in software, removing the opportunity for
                    lawyers to use their judgement to save some time.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466741>
68.
    onyomi says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:58 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465359>
    ~new~

    Thinking a bit more about it, it strikes me that the core of the
    issue here is not absolute living standards, but the gap between the
    kind of life we seem to think we should be able to afford and the
    kind of life we really can afford, which seems to be getting bigger
    and bigger.

    And there isn’t any obvious psychological reason why this would be
    so: yes, people’s expectations get higher as they get richer and
    technology advances such that what was once a middle class lifestyle
    now seems poor and what was once poor now destitute, and so on, but
    that does nothing to explain why the gap between expectation and
    reality would grow (if anything, with technology developing
    exponentially, basing one’s expectations of future growth on the
    past should, if anything, cause one to underestimate the future, at
    least as far as technology is concerned).

    I wonder if part of it is just that both governments and private
    corporations have both gotten better and better at finding
    innovative ways to allow us to leverage future expectations for the
    purposes of current consumption? Of course, someone has to be paying
    for all that right now, and I think in the US case it is mostly the
    third world living beneath their means to buy US treasuries so we
    can live beyond our means.

    Not just national debt and of course, credit card offers seem much
    more plentiful. That is, keeping up with the Joneses, if the Joneses
    have subsidized student loans and several credit cards, is a lot
    harder, unless, of course, you also take on such debts, at which
    point you are now even with them as compared to the world in which
    these loans were not available to either of you. But the longer you
    eat your seed corn the poorer you are getting in reality even as it
    seems, temporarily, that you are enjoying a good lifestyle.

    The result is everyone living beyond their means to the point that
    attempting to live within one’s means either feels like a ridiculous
    hardship relative to the lifestyle the culture leads you to expect
    is normative, or else only attainable for the wealthy.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Aapje says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:12 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465369>
        ~new~

        Isn’t that the logical result if you proudly tell people that
        your economy grows by a certain percentage, but fail to tell
        them that most of that money goes to the 1%?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465359>
          o
            Spookykou says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:45 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465747>
            ~new~

            I would think that there are plenty of culture factors that
            would push people to live beyond their means(Zero sum
            positional games, the alter upon which all progress is
            sacrificed) , but I doubt duplicitous economic growth
            reporting is to blame.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465369>
69.
    rsj says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 10:08 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465365>
    ~new~

    There are different types of “cost disease”. Baumol cost disease,
    for example, is different from health care. In health care, people
    are willing to pay a lot for a small marginal gain. Say dying
    tomorrow instead of 6 months from now. Because of this and
    diminishing returns, the health care system expands to deliver
    small, marginal gains at the cost of consuming a lot of resources.

    While the wages of health care workers might not be going up a lot,
    the number of health care workers certainly is. At this point,
    health care is basically the largest private employer in pretty much
    every state. Soon, we will all be working in health care, delivering
    very small marginal improvements /joking, kinda.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Marklouis says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:18 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465517>
        ~new~

        Let’s say that you are someone who is not willing to pay a lot
        for a small improvement (like me). Now lets say you are mandated
        to have health insurance. How do you avoid paying a lot?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465365>
70.
    alwhite says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 10:09 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465366>
    ~new~

    I thought there was an explanation for medical costs rising; end of
    life care.

    There’s a study referenced here (Banarto, McClellan, Kagy and
    Garber, 2004)
    <http://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelbell/2013/01/10/why-5-of-patients-create-50-of-health-care-costs/#16a97e8a4781>
    that says 30% of all medicare costs go to 5% of the population that
    dies that year.

    A counter argument saying that it is a myth
    <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4638261/>.

    And I’ve heard some arguments on this that new treatments are being
    created for little benefit, e.g. a new drug that increases life
    expectancy by 50%! Which means life expectancy goes from 4 months to
    6 months. The cost of developing this would be high, so the company
    wants to make that money back through high pricing and good
    marketing. But the end result would have minimal effect on life
    expectancy rates.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        David Manheim <http://www.twitter.com/davidmanheim> says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:06 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465466>
        ~new~

        The question is why. And Scott’s arguments above are at a loss.
        But a combination of my claims re: misalignment of investment
        for superior goods, where all the money chases small returns –
        https://medium.com/@davidmanheim/chasing-superior-good-syndrome-vs-baumols-or-scott-s-cost-disease-40327ae87b45
        and Robin Hanson’s paper on how overspending is a way to show
        caring – http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/showcare.pdf I think
        explains the exact dynamic well.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465366>
71.
    scareduck says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 10:13 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465370>
    ~new~

    All these things are either government-supplied (K-12 education),
    heavily government subsidized (Medicare) or regulated (health care
    more generally, higher education, the risk part of home mortgages
    [Fannie Mae]).

    As others upthread, the cost of public employees — public
    schoolteachers particularly — is very understated because it does
    not address actual total /compensation/, including medical benefits
    and earned pensions, as well as administrative bloat and the role in
    credentialism in expanding pay in those ranks.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        TheAncientGeekAKA1Z <https://pierrephilosophique.wordpress.com/>
        says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:03 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465462>
        ~new~

        Also upthread: the private sector has its own cost disease, CEO.
        compensation.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465370>
          o
            Matt M says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465484>
            ~new~

            And that’s a poor comparison, because CEO pay has not (as a
            rule) trickled down to higher costs to the consumer.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465462>
72.
    rrb says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 10:23 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465377>
    ~new~

    Do American healthcare consumers pay for the entire world’s
    healthcare technological progress?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Aapje says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 10:29 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465383>
        ~new~

        No.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465377>
      *
        Corey says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:13 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465418>
        ~new~

        No, we pay significantly *more* than enough to subsidize it all.
        (TBF I’ve only done the explicit analysis for drugs, which are
        kind of low-hanging fruit on that axis; maybe medical devices,
        surgical techniques, etc. are very different, but I doubt it)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465377>
73.
    Dr Dealgood says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 10:31 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465387>
    ~new~

    One theory that these prince increases are driven by consulting fees
    replacing, or supplementing, bribes.

    (/This was originally an idea I heard from Jim, though I use more
    polite and less hyperbolic language to describe it./)

    Back in the Olden Days, if you wanted to get a building built in the
    city you’d go visit the Don and hand him a big briefcase of
    twenties. Then he’d go around to his friends in the unions and the
    housing board and tell them that getting your building built is a
    big priority.

    Today, if you wanted to get that building built you still might have
    to give the Don his briefcase. But then you also have to hire an
    environmental impact consultant to do the same thing with the
    environmental advocacy groups and the EPA, plus a diversity
    consultant to do the same thing with the minority advocacy groups
    and EEOP, plus a permit-expediting consultant to to do the same
    thing with the housing board, plus a PR consultant to do the same
    thing with the newspapers… And by the time you’re done paying
    everyone with their hand out, you’ve paid ten times what the Don
    ever asked for.

    I’ve definitely heard of this happening in education from the
    teachers in my family, and I’ve seen it happen in the lab. From what
    I hear medicine and construction are ground-zero for this sort of
    thing. It might not be the whole story but it seems to play a role.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Douglas Knight says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 12:40 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465485>
        ~new~

        I think I understand what you mean about construction, but how
        does this happen in education, medicine, and the lab? Do you
        just mean that they need buildings, too? But isn’t that a small
        part of their budget? What else is held hostage? publicity?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465387>
          o
            Edward Scizorhands says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 12:55 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465497>
            ~new~

            It would explain way subways are 20x more expensive, being
            pure building, and maybe that’s why education is “just” 10x
            more expensive.

            Or maybe it explains 5x of schools getting more expensive
            and something else is the other 2x.

            Building subways probably should get /somewhat/ more
            expensive, because even if everyone plays ball, it’s going
            to take work to make sure you aren’t boring through
            something important, and/or deal with the damage that does
            occur when you bore through some critical piece of
            infrastructure that no one knew was buried there 100 years
            ago. Still not 20x, though.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465485>
          o
            Dr Dealgood says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:34 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465732>
            ~new~

                I think I understand what you mean about construction,
                but how does this happen in education, medicine, and the
                lab?

            In the lab, how it works is roughly this:

            Let’s say you have a BSL 2+ lab in NYC, where you work with
            mice as well as human and mouse tissue cultures including
            primary patient cultures. You sometimes use P32 labelled
            phosphate in experiments.

            Every so often the FDNY will send an inspector into your
            lab. When he arrives, you need to show him (/among other
            things/) your C14 certificates. You get these certificates
            by hiring an approved third party to put the answers to the
            C14 test up on a projector, turn the projector off while
            handing out the test, and then looking over them to make
            sure they have more than 70% right. He will also check the
            dates on various tags hanging off of your faucets and the
            labels attached to your refrigerators. You pay a third party
            to come in periodically and put new tags and labels on. He
            will also make sure that you bought the right brand of doors
            and door labels, the right brand of shelving, the right
            brand of storage box, etc. You should make sure your EHS
            department has hired at least one or two ex-FDNY Fire Safety
            experts to run your own inspections beforehand.

            This process, with minor variations, is repeated with the
            NYC Department of Health, NIH Office of Laboratory Animal
            Welfare, NIH DOHS, HHS and the NRC. Any one of whom can shut
            you down if you fail an inspection. There are probably more,
            but I’m not a PI so I’m insulated from a lot of the
            behind-the-scenes stuff.

            *TL;DR*: Instead of just slipping someone a cash envelope
            you pay an order of magnitude or two more a year on
            trainings or certifications by third parties and buying
            products at a 10-100x markup from approved vendors.
            Everything is legal and above-board, and most importantly
            the people involved all still get their cut, but the process
            is extremely wasteful.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465485>
              +
                Douglas Knight says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 10:15 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465810>
                ~new~

                OK, but how can you tell the difference between
                corruption and lousy regulation? Can anyone get licensed
                to administer C14 tests? How do you know that “the
                people involved” get their cut? (excepting the ex-FDNY)
                Of course, even if it is open, the middlemen are people
                who specialize in dealing with the government and lobby
                for more regulation.

                Moreover, if it is all aboveboard, an explicit set of
                hoops to jump through, then you know what the price is
                and can plan ahead. My understanding of Jim’s point is
                not that 10 people with vetos means 10x the bribe, but
                unlimited bribes. If there is one boss, he asks for a
                percent of your profit, low enough not to kill the
                golden goose. If there are 10 veto points sizing you up
                demanding bribes, it is a prisoners’ dilemma between
                them and they ask for too much and you don’t build.
                Whereas NIH has explicit guidelines. The cost requires
                more money in planning a lab, preventing some labs, but
                it is a predictable cost so richer labs still happen.
                This is a qualitative difference.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465732>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 10, 2017 at 10:22 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465812>
                    ~new~

                    >OK, but how can you tell the difference between
                    corruption and lousy regulation?

                    the point is it doesn’t matter. Hell, even if it’s
                    good regulation, too much and it stops being a net
                    positive just by sheer weight of burden.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465810>
                  #
                    Douglas Knight says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 11:14 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465920>
                    ~new~

                    If you can’t tell and it doesn’t make a difference,
                    don’t say it’s corruption. But we’re not talking
                    about your point; we’re talking about Jim or Dr
                    Dealgood’s. Dealgood seems to say that he can tell.
                    I’m not sure whether he thinks it makes a
                    difference. I detailed in my second paragraph how it
                    could make a difference; I think this argument is
                    from Jim and he thinks it makes a difference.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465810>
      *
        Douglas Knight says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:27 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465564>
        ~new~

        No, wait, I don’t understand the construction example. If
        payoffs really had a substantial effect on the price, they would
        be too big to hide. Do we see environmental consulting fees
        taking up such a large portion of the budget? I think not. Maybe
        many administrators are actually bribes. If 10% of the
        apartments are “affordable,” that could raise prices by 10%,
        whether they are bribes or not. But if the discounted rent
        reflects what the price would be otherwise, maybe they don’t
        raise the other prices at all!

        I do think that it is plausible that a large number of
        independent veto points could result in a high risk, especially
        risk of delays, requiring a high profit, resulting in high
        prices, but still the profit flowing to the owner of the real
        estate.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465387>
74.
    Janet says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 10:59 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465408>
    ~new~

    Two comments: one, regarding why colleges declare a huge cost, then
    give scholarships to a majority of the students. From the college’s
    standpoint, they need two things: 1) enough smart students to
    maintain their prestige (and do the complicated nug work for the
    professors, at research institutions), and 2) enough tuition income
    to pay the bills. We might add 1a) enough smart, visible minority
    students to keep the diversity numbers looking good enough to fend
    off attacks; 1b) for state-supported schools, enough children of
    in-state elites to fend off challenges to the state funding; and 1c)
    for private schools, enough children of elites/alumni to keep the
    donations flowing.

    So, you have two groups of students: the brains and the bucks, which
    don’t overlap all that much. Colleges need to compete heavily for
    the brains, especially brains from demographically important
    sub-groups– these people are enticed with targeted funding, to get
    ones who could go to higher-ranked schools to instead come to the
    offering school. The bucks come from less smart kids, who couldn’t
    get in to higher-ranked schools, and from foreigners. This is a
    sliding scale, of course– marking up the price, then giving you 10%
    off to make you feel like you’ve got a good deal, just like on QVC.
    In larger schools, this is worked out with an explicit mathematical
    formula, but every selective-admission school does it.

    Jumping subjects: I think part of the answer as to “where is the
    money going” is to retirement funding for the current staff. Before
    the 1930s, nobody “retired” at all– you worked until you couldn’t
    anymore, and then your family was supposed to take you in and take
    care of you. (Anyone without family to take them in was in dire
    straits.) When social security came into effect, the “retirement”
    age was greater than the life expectancy– roughly, as if the
    retirement age today was 80. And SS was considered radical at the time.

    But now, we expect to not have to start work until our mid-20s (or
    later!), stop working by 65 (at the latest), and then live at the
    same standard of living for the rest of our lives (20+ years), all
    without a dime of money or a minute of unpaid work from our family.
    That’s a HUGE “purchase” to attempt to make– a million bucks, if
    you’re earning $50K a year (more if you live longer). No society has
    ever even attempted this feat, until now. No wonder the jobs which
    involve a lot of human workers (education, health care) have gotten
    vastly more expensive.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Matt M says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:18 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465422>
        ~new~

        This is a very good point.

        And pointing to things like “pensions haven’t increased much
        since the 1950s” misses a lot of it because my understanding is
        that pensions were just being invented in the 1950s, and were
        being offered to new workers, and there was no large pool of
        already-retired workers collecting them for 20+ years.

        Considering “retirement” as a new entitlement program that costs
        on average $1 million per person and is funded by some mixture
        of the state and the person’s employer would go a long way
        towards explaining why costs have risen significantly.

        And this is not capture by the various hypothetical questions in
        the OP. So the proper framing would not be “Would you rather
        live in a house like your parents for half the cost?” but rather
        “Would you rather live in a house like your parents for half the
        cost but you enter the workforce at age 18 and you continue
        working until you keel over and die?”

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465408>
      *
        neonwattagelimit says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:35 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465615>
        ~new~

        I would not be surprised if retirement were part of the puzzle
        here, but I gotta push back against this one a little.

            When social security came into effect, the “retirement” age
            was greater than the life expectancy– roughly, as if the
            retirement age today was 80. And SS was considered radical
            at the time.

        Yes, but you can’t base this off overall life expectancy. You
        need to look at life expectancy at 60 or 65. Per this table
        <https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2011/022.pdf>, life
        expectancy in the US at age 65 was about five years higher in
        2010 than in 1950. A meaningful increase, yes, but not “as if
        the retirement age today was 80.” For most of history, overall
        life expectancy was 30 or 40, but if you made it to adulthood,
        you’d probably make it to 60 or so.

            But now, we expect to not have to start work until our
            mid-20s (or later!), stop working by 65 (at the latest), and
            then live at the same standard of living for the rest of our
            lives (20+ years), all without a dime of money or a minute
            of unpaid work from our family.

        I feel like this may have been true if we were having this
        conversation 40 years ago. Anecdotal, but my impression is that
        WWII generation were the ones who really got to see the benefit
        of this. In my family, most folks in my grandparents’ generation
        were retired by 60; most folks of my parents’ generation
        (Boomers) worked well into their 60s, at least until 65 in most
        cases. I believe data backs this up: people actually are working
        to older ages today than they used to. They are starting later,
        though.

        I agree with the general point that we probably need to rethink
        the notion of “retirement,” for a variety of reasons. But I’m
        skeptical that it is the driving force behind cost disease
        (though it could well be a contributor), and I don’t think the
        answer is really “let’s go back to the way it was.”

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465408>
          o
            random832 says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 5:51 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466027>
            ~new~

                Yes, but you can’t base this off overall life
                expectancy. You need to look at life expectancy at 60 or 65.

            I think the number that really matters is life expectancy at
            the age of entering the workforce, which your table doesn’t
            show.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465615>
75.
    vpaul says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:03 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465411>
    ~new~

    This is a good post but I think there are reasons to be more
    optimistic. As bad as the increasing costs are for medical care and
    education, your phone example shows concurrent gigantic increases in
    standard of living. I don’t believe inflation rates accurately
    reflect product innovation – consider how much someone would pay for
    a “new” five year old model iPhone (or TV or computer or speaker
    system. . .) This does make increasing costs in other sectors look
    even worse, but it shows how bad inflation is as a measure of
    anything aside from the price of peanut butter over time. Innovation
    can find a way around these bloated sectors. Uber / autonomous cars
    can make the subway system moot, deep learning could greatly improve
    / cheapen medical diagnosis, better credentialing could finally get
    online education mainstream, and Airbnb could make a dent on housing
    costs. I think that markets are finally at the point of getting
    around cost disease / regulatory roadblocks in these areas.

    Also even though I suspect that regulatory burden and poor
    incentives from regulations are behind all of your examples, I think
    that housing is the case with the most empirical support (consider
    e.g. SF v. Houston). I think maybe you should not have included it
    in fairness to the other examples. Other things that may fit better:
    legal services and sports.

    Lastly, as a libertarian who cares about poor people, I object to
    tax and spend policies because of deadweight loss, knowledge
    problems, bad incentives from regulations leading to
    counterproductive outcomes, unfair burdens and benefits of taxation,
    and the difficulty of getting rid of underperforming agencies /
    bureaucracies. Only the last point seems somewhat related to cost
    disease.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        neonwattagelimit says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:51 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465630>
        ~new~

            Uber / autonomous cars can make the subway system moot

        No they can’t, and for a very simple reason: a car takes up
        much, much more space than a person (or even two people, or
        five). The subway remains the most efficient means of
        transporting large numbers of people through urban space, by a
        longshot. This image,
        <http://99percentinvisible.tumblr.com/image/126104528126> though
        it only shows you buses, give you some conception of what I am
        talking about. This is a matter of simple geometry.

            better credentialing could finally get online education
            mainstream

        Define “mainstream.” I do think online education probably does,
        and should, have a role to play in the education of the future,
        but I also think people who believe that it can be an effective
        wholesale replacement for schools are failing to see the biases
        created by their own experiences and personalities.

            Airbnb could make a dent on housing costs

        I like Airbnb, but I don’t really see how it could make a dent
        in housing costs in a large-scale way. If *everyone* did Airbnb,
        then the supply would be such that you probably could not
        generate enough revenue from it to substantially offset housing
        costs.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465411>
          o
            Deiseach says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:03 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465682>
            ~new~

            /Airbnb could make a dent on housing costs/

            Airbnb is being accused of exactly that
            <http://www.thejournal.ie/airbnb-rental-2801608-Jun2016/> –
            by driving up rents and contributing to the housing shortage
            because people figure they can make more money as hosts for
            Airbnb guests than renting out their properties to tenants.
            Some clever chaps
            <http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/man-who-rents-40-properties-and-leases-them-through-airbnb-confronted-by-landlord-35157078.html>
            are even figuring out how to turn a profit by renting from a
            landlord as a conventional tenant and then sub-letting as an
            Airbnb host!

                Mr Murphy said that he tended to double the rent on a
                property for Airbnb, but that he was paying Ms Black a
                good rent: “I was paying enough rent for her to be
                happy, but some people can’t be happy.”

            If your tenant can charge double the rent for the property,
            why not cut out the middleman and rent that property out to
            Airbnb guests for the doubled rent yourself? (Never mind the
            hosts unhappy that their earnings are taxable and that
            Airbnb are reporting to the Revenue Commissioners – there
            does tend to be quite a strong strain of Irish landlords not
            declaring rental income for tax, which has a knock-on effect
            on tenants’ rights e.g. not providing rent books, which by
            law they are required to do, since that would be evidence
            that they are receiving money from rentals. This also means
            that tenants in a dispute can’t prove they are tenants and
            that person is their landlord if they have no evidence of
            paying rent).

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465630>
              +
                Incurian says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:39 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465738>
                ~new~

                    If your tenant can charge double the rent for the
                    property, why not cut out the middleman and rent
                    that property out to Airbnb guests for the doubled
                    rent yourself?

                Zoning regulations, I imagine.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465682>
76.
    jbslattery says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:14 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465419>
    ~new~

    One note on veterinary costs/regulation – while it may not be as
    extensive as regulation in the human medical treatment field, vets
    are increasingly roped in to the prescription/regulatory system. A
    friend of mine has to get a prescription to buy her cat’s food.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
77.
    Corey says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:15 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465420>
    ~new~

    There’s an interesting idea I saw somewhere to break the
    employer-credentialism cycle keeping college supply low – company
    schools.

    The thought experiment: Amazon does for college what they did for
    clouds. They start an Amazon U for their employees to use. Obviously
    Amazon themselves accept degrees from there since that’s the whole
    raisin d’entree. It gets good results cheap, because they can. Then
    it gets opened up to outsiders, then other employers start accepting
    the degrees because Amazon did and didn’t fall apart.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:56 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465677>
        ~new~

        Which may then get the problem of “We want to hire someone with
        a degree from Amazon U because that’s a valuable degree and
        everyone else in the field is doing it; your degree from
        Redbrick U (formerly the Polytechnic of Redbrick) isn’t any good
        to us”.

        I do think a large part of the elite university degree chasing
        is because companies consider “this applicant studied under the
        leaders in their fields, they made connections, they know the
        up-and-comers, they’re plugged into the network and besides, all
        our management went there in their day” whereas a degree from
        Cornfield University may technically be as good, but whoever
        heard of Professor Smith (your tutor) versus Nick Bostrom of Oxford?

        It’s the same reasoning I saw about why are all the tech hubs in
        California – sure, a city in the Rust Belt could spend a lot of
        money setting itself up as a tech hub but it won’t attract in
        the kinds of successful start-ups it wants; they’re all headed
        for the Bay Area and Silicon Valley because that’s where the big
        fish are, and if they want access to the venture capitalists and
        opportunities to grab attention of one of the big fish, that’s
        where they have to go. Technically, in a wired and
        interconnected global environment, there’s no reason you can’t
        transform Milltown from “former paper milling town” to “tech hub
        for the region” but in practice it’s not going to work out that
        easily.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465420>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:12 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465718>
            ~new~

            https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_agglomeration

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465677>
78.
    Corey says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:22 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465427>
    ~new~

    For those interested in healthcare cost analysis, I recommend the
    TIE FAQ series
    <http://theincidentaleconomist.com/wordpress/what-makes-the-us-health-care-system-so-expensive-faq/>
    on the subject. (The link there to the main FAQ index also has lots
    of other good information).

    Spoiler: it’s everything – not just end-of-life care, or FDA regs &
    patent policy, or fat, etc, they all play a part, with no particular
    driver of increased cost being much larger than the others.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
79.
    n8chz says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:22 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465428>
    ~new~

    Here’s a “model” that I came up with, which means it’s an entirely
    amateur model. It also smells of “lump of labor,” but bear with me.
    It appears to my untrained eye that virtually all industries are
    less labor intensive than they used to be. But the extent of this
    decimation of jobs varies between sector. So we have Facebook-type
    entities operating almost as “lights out” operations, with
    werehousing and manufacturing not far behind in level of automation.
    As recently as the 1990’s the so-called service sector was supposed
    to absorb the surplus labor, but there you have inventions like the
    “call center” based on the realization that phone answerers and
    entities on whose behalf phones are answered can be modeled as a
    many-to-many relation. That and many other “efficiencies” hollow out
    service sector employment. At this point the health care professions
    are the only college degrees that open any doors of opportunity
    whatsoever. America today is very much like Vonnegut’s dystopian
    novel /Player Piano/ except the last dominoes standing are nurses
    and other allied health professionals, not engineers and managers as
    in the novel. Basically, you have the combined wages from all the
    industries other than health care (or education, if you prefer) as
    the pool of money out of which the wages in health care get paid. To
    the extent that health care sector is a larger slice, not
    necessarily of the GDP pie, but of the workfarce pie, the bigger
    burden it is on the overall workforce.

    Perhaps, in the minds of people deciding on a career, the fact that
    health care skills are the only skills really in demand counts for
    more than the fact that the health care professions are facing
    record levels of stress, burnout and downward pressure on wages. All
    the other sectors offer the same dysmenities, only more so. So
    everyone wants a marketable degree, which is to say, a degree in a
    human services field. The less outsourceable job is the one in
    service to the human body, after all. So now practice of
    occupational therapy requires a master’s degree, and physical
    therapy requires a doctorate. Applicant/opening ratio in the MSOT
    program at my local public university currently runs 10:1, which I
    believe is probably the main driver of the mushrooming in for-profit
    schools with curriculum limited to business/IT/healthcare (in some
    cases just healthcare) and tuition levels well above traditional
    private universities. I think of them (speculatively of course) as
    today’s version of the Caribbean medical school circa 1983. (The
    “Baby Doc College of Physicians and Surgeons” for those who were
    into /Doonesbury/ back then). Where is the money going? You seem to
    have demonstrated, with your graphs, “not into profits.” But profits
    are after expenditures, expenditures includes salaries, and salaries
    includes CEO salaries. Also, some of the expenditures of the big
    companies go to the posted profits (and also executive salaries) of
    first, second, third tier suppliers of the hospitals, universities,
    etc. sending consumers and insurers the six-digit bills. So largely,
    the money, maybe is going into executive salaries. Since you like
    time series graphs, it might be fun to take a peek at which way
    that’s trending.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Corey says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:30 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465434>
        ~new~

            dysmenities

        Totally stealing this.

            smells of “lump of labor,”

        A couple threads down (re: AI) people are debating
        “technological unemployment” which touches on this. Old-school
        econ basically claims a society can’t ever run out of work to
        do, but people are coming around to the idea that with big
        enough productivity it may not be possible for demand to keep up
        to full employment. This gets shorthanded as “robots”, both
        because of technological productivity drivers and also because
        of a limit case: human-level AI would be sufficient to
        outcompete humans for every job, with actual robots if you will.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465428>
          o
            n8chz says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 11:45 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465927>
            ~new~

            Full unemployment has been a moving goalpost for a long
            time. That’s why they invented NAIRU. I suspect that full
            unemployment (running out of work to do) will be a similarly
            elusive goal, should we decide to go for it. More likely we
            don’t commit to either goal and continue the frustrations
            both of those who can’t get out of mandatory overtime, and
            those who can’t break into full time hours.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465434>
80.
    Mengsk <https://narrativeleaps.wordpress.com/> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:25 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465431>
    ~new~

    One thought that applies to medicine, but maybe not to other things,
    is the fact that better technology has a tendency to transform acute
    and fatal conditions into expensive, chronic conditions. For
    example, you’re shelling out thousands of dollars a week on hospital
    “frequent flier” who would, in a society with less advanced medical
    technology would have died from something or other after their
    second or third trip to the emergency room.

    Another likely factor is the tendency for expensive medical
    treatments to give you diminishing returns as you get close to the
    end of life. It’s pretty well known that you’re incurring a
    significant fraction of your medical expenses during your last year
    of life, but these medical expenses (by definition) cannot add more
    than a year to your life.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Randy M says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:03 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465635>
        ~new~

        And with modern educational technology, you are able to transfer
        a likely college drop-out into a six year cartography program.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465431>
          o
            Incurian says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:42 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465743>
            ~new~

            Obviously this blue part here is the land.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465635>
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:17 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465722>
        ~new~

        The effect you’re pointing out is real, and a definite cause of
        specious claims like “US infant mortality rates are worse than
        Cuba!”, because we can take an infant who would be written off
        as a stillbirth in a less-advanced country and keep them alive
        for a little while longer.

        But it doesn’t explain why US medical costs are so much higher
        than countries with equally-advanced medical systems and
        similar-or-better life expectancies and end-of-life care, such
        as Canada and Japan.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465431>
          o
            dumky2 says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:08 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465873>
            ~new~

            Costs and life expectancy don’t have to be synchronized.
            Scott Atlas argues that the lower life expectancy is not an
            indictment of healthcare quality, but rather lifestyle
            choices: more car accidents, more in-vitros and more obesity
            in the US.
            When controlling for those, the US healthcare and life
            expectancy comes out on top (so those factors are impactful).

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465722>
          o
            Corey says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 8:32 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466077>
            ~new~

            They have price controls, we don’t, simple as that.

            I’d prefer that if we need to subsidize the world’s R&D that
            we just do that directly, and pick up the same price
            controls, rather than let prices float ever upwards in a
            dysfunctional vague approximation of a market. For drugs, at
            least, if we did that we’d save a lot of money overall,
            don’t know about other facets of medical innovation.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465722>
81.
    Garrett M. Petersen <http://economicsdetective.com/> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:26 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465432>
    ~new~

    You mentioned housing at the start, but didn’t follow up on it.
    That’s a case where the cause of increased costs is fairly
    unambiguous: There’s been a proliferation of laws enacted at the
    local level that restrict the elasticity of the housing supply.
    Nolan Gray jokingly calls it The War on Affordable Housing.

    I was really interested in this topic, so I did three podcast
    episodes about it:

    1) Trailer Parks, Zoning, and Market Urbanism with Nolan Gray
    <http://economicsdetective.com/2016/09/trailer-parks-zoning-market-urbanism-nolan-gray/>
    2) New York Urbanism with Stephen Smith
    <http://economicsdetective.com/2016/10/new-york-urbanism-stephen-smith/>
    3) How Land Use Restrictions Make Housing Unaffordable with Emily
    Hamilton
    <http://economicsdetective.com/2016/10/land-use-restrictions-make-housing-unaffordable-emily-hamilton/>

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Matt M says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:37 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465442>
        ~new~

        The problem of skyrocketing housing pricesis virtually
        non-existent in Japan
        <https://fee.org/articles/why-isnt-rent-in-tokyo-out-of-control/>,
        despite also having high population density and being very well
        developed. Seems to mostly be related to various regulatory burdens.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465432>
82.
    dianelritter says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:05 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465464>
    ~new~

    Three completely unrelated comments:

    1) Did the graphs on the ‘salary’ costs for Public School teachers,
    and Nurses and Professors include the cost of their benefits? If it
    doesn’t then the numbers are very misleading — I have no doubt that
    total benefits have been rising much faster than baseline salaries
    (partly of course because a very considerable part of the ‘benefits’
    are insurance for the 10x rising health care costs). As you
    mentioned public pensions have dramatically increased as well and
    those costs should also be included in the ‘total compensation’ if
    you want anything like an accurate picture of how real compensation
    levels for teacher/nurses/doctors/professors have changed (or not)
    over time.

    2) FYI, the Khan academy is more a replacement for K-12 education
    than a replacement for college. I’m sure there are great places to
    get on-line degrees, but that’s not what the Khan Academy is doing.
    Their interactive math problem sets start right down in 2nd grade
    type things: [here are 3 ducks (shows pictures of 3 ducks paddling
    around) and here are 2 more ducks (ditto) how many ducks are there
    altogether…] One of the most fun things I have done in recent years
    was to get myself an account there (it’s free!) and work my way
    through the entire series starting about in the 4th grade
    (geometry!) and up through calculus. They haven’t quite gotten it to
    the point where it is as fun as playing a video game, but it is
    close. A big part of it is immediate feedback. You figure out your
    answer, and type it in and bang! right away you get feedback, right
    or wrong, plus suggestions and help links to figure out what you did
    wrong. I don’t think the Khan academy is a superior education to a
    public school for things like English or History, at least not yet.
    But their math problem sets beats convention education flat. The
    fact that it is also free is just a side bennie. As soon as they
    implement comparable quality interactive learning/computer problem
    sets for History and Chemistry and English, anyone will be able to
    get a *better* K-12 education on-line than in any public school in
    the world.

    3) If you’d like to know more about what publicly funded hospitals
    in India are like, I would strongly recommend “Better” a book by
    Atul Gawande. One of the chapters describes a month he spent
    volunteering in public hospitals in India, and all the things he saw
    when he was there. It was amazingly interesting. The degree of
    soviet style inefficiency on display was simply staggering (brand
    new MRI machines but no basic supplies, not even sterile bandages;
    the families of patients admitted to the hospital had to go out and
    buy their medical supplies in little hole in the wall stores
    clustered around each hospital; they even have to go out and buy the
    surgical supplies needed before the surgeon can operate.) It was
    simply mind boggling. Lots of stories of astonishing dedication and
    competency by individual physicians and nurse, coupled with
    malfeasance and/or corruption on a truly industrial scale by far
    away bureaucrats in the heath ministries.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
83.
    Marklouis says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:05 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465465>
    ~new~

    It may be as simple as: look for areas where demand is subsidized
    and supply is constrained.

    In my opinion, a large role government is to support
    competition…always and everywhere. The goal of business is always to
    create competitive barriers. When that occurs via productive ways (a
    better product at a lower price) everyone benefits. When that occurs
    many other ways (regulatory barriers, monopoly power, bribes) there
    is no such gain. There is a role for government to play in helping
    to tear-down these non-productive barriers as a means of keeping
    markets properly functioning (i.e., productive). Today’s government
    seems more interested subsidizing demand where non-market forces
    have pushed prices up…which is of course a recipe for further
    inflation and further non-productive barriers (since the rewards to
    such go up).

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
84.
    Serinis says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:13 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465470>
    ~new~

    Short List of Other possible reasons – Short concepts not fulling
    fleshed ideas.

    *One* There is is the economic equivalent of parasites/parasitical
    behavior that has suddenly grown massively, probably due to the
    massive increase in available food for it. In which case the
    equivalent of deworming a cat is required.

    *Two:* Given that the modern economy is relatively new and by the
    time scales of most civilizations, isn’t even in puberty yet
    (Industrial civilization from the 18th Century isn’t that old
    either) and there are completely unexpected problems that we don’t
    even recognize. Might not have the right metrics, theories and
    examples of other similar economies to really understand what’s
    happening.

    E.g. We known Communism is a failed mode for running a modern
    Industrial economy, but that doesn’t mean the same trap won’t hit
    modern capitalism (Civilization Teething)

    *Three:* There’s a hidden cost or rising burden on the economy that
    is manifesting as an increasing cost in these sectors for whatever
    reason. Thinking of limit to growths idea of the rising costs of
    pollution eventually overcoming any growth in at least one model
    (would need to reread for proper explanation).

    Does pollution need to be a physical thing like C02 or arsenic for
    this model to make sense?
    Also for this idea, pollution could be something we think is
    positive but does burden the economy.

    *Four:* The rapid change in technology for some areas is increasing
    inefficiency and decreasing the ability to become more efficient
    over time, but this is an overall trend that is hidden by its
    timescale (decades of tiny changes).

    Think of a column by Shamus Young (Escapist) where he talked about
    video game artists not being able to truly learn their tools because
    they change to quickly and wondering would this impact process that
    require paperwork since document management systems changing would
    initially decrease effectiveness and if changed to quickly the
    increase in efficiency/productivity won’t make up for the initial drop.

    *Five:* A really weird mixture of all the possibilities, since non
    is obvious.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Serinis says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 7:24 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465770>
        ~new~

        Follow up – the cost disease is also a possible explanation for
        how you get articles about American doing fine and good economic
        indicators, yet Trump won the presidency on a campaign that is
        all about the opposite.

        Due to these massive rises in the cost of the things that matter
        deeply to people & the chance they could begin crowding out
        other expenses, all those good economic metrics are showing a
        very weak countertrend that is not overcoming the cost rises.

        i.e. The costs & downsides are growing faster than the profits &
        benefits.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465470>
85.
    citizencokane <http://citizencokane.wordpress.com> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:16 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465473>
    ~new~

    One problem in this discussion is that everyone is using dollar
    prices. Consider using gold prices instead. To find hte gold-prices
    of things, take their dollar prices and divide those prices by the
    price of gold in dollars/oz. What would you find in that case?

    1. For starters, it is worth noting that in J. M. Keynes’s day, the
    price of gold was $20/oz. Now it is $1300/oz., an increase of over
    50 times. This will affect our gold-price calculations.
    2. The gold-prices of things like electronics, food, automobiles,
    etc. have declined drastically since World War II. This reflects the
    productivity increases in these sectors in comparison to the gold
    mining sector.
    3. The gold-prices of things like housing, healthcare, and education
    have stayed about the same. The productivity increases in these
    sectors have been commensurable with the productivity increases in
    the gold mining sector.
    4. The gold-prices of wage labor have declined drastically. Workers
    earn drastically less gold in each week’s paycheck. The reason
    people do not feel poorer is, the gold-prices of most (but not all)
    of their necessities have likewise declined. It costs less in gold
    terms to support a worker’s subsistence…if you disregard things like
    college, healthcare, etc.

    I think the dominant narrative frames the story in the wrong way. It
    is not that the cost of healthcare, education, etc. have increased,
    but that the costs in these sectors have failed to decline (when
    measured in gold terms), which, in conjunction with decreasing wages
    (in gold terms) leads to people being poorer in these areas, even
    while in other areas where price declines have kept pace with wage
    declines, people do not feel poorer. The reason we do not perceive
    things this way is, the depreciation of the dollar against gold has
    obscured this.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        CatCube says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:40 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465534>
        ~new~

        I don’t know about using “gold” as some sort of standard
        measure. The reason gold was $20/oz in the 30s is that it was
        dictated to be that price. The definition of a dollar was 1/20th
        of an ounce of gold. Once that link is broken, talking about how
        much “gold” somebody earns today is pretty much meaningless,
        since the 1/20th of an ounce of gold as a dollar was pretty
        meaningless before; it was set by fiat, not some rational process.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465473>
          o
            spencerengland says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 2:52 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465579>
            ~new~

            Under the old system when the US Treasury and the Bank of
            England pegged the price of gold at $20 the price was
            probably above the market clearing price. You can tell this
            because government gold holding kept increasing. That
            implied there was not sufficient private demand at $20 to
            clear the market, leaving a surplus for the government to
            add to its stocks.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465534>
86.
    phoniel says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:18 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465474>
    ~new~

    When we do these calculations comparing cost to GDP, is there any
    way to figure out costs in comparison with /leveraged/ GDP — i.e.
    GDP plus whatever we’ve taken out in loans, without fully
    subtracting the future debt obligations? Can our costs be explained
    simply by imagining that people are willing to pay some fixed
    percentage of their money on hand for coverage, and then realizing
    that in the US, loans put more money into people’s hands than in
    other countries?

    Maybe the important variable here is just availability of cash:
    people with lots on hand are willing to spend more than they need
    for no good reason, and those around them follow along both because
    prices rise and also because the culture prevents them from opting
    out. There isn’t much of a counteracting force because of readily
    available loans and credit put money in everybody’s pocket — money
    which gets spent recklessly because people aren’t good at handling
    debt. Everyone sees the spending, nobody sees (or talks about) the
    loan, and so there’s no social mechanism to encourage thrift.

    Another question: is there a way to break down healthcare spending
    by percentile, and then compare that across countries? Is it very
    wealthy Americans, very poor Americans, middle-classed Americans, or
    some combination of these groups which pay more than you’d expect
    for similarly-wealthy citizens in another developed country?

    An anecdote which might say nothing, but which informs the above
    thoughts: When I got my first big-shot job out of college, I rented
    a single-room occupancy in the cheapest part of town. I cannot tell
    you the flak I got for this decision. My parents were terrified I
    would be the victim of crime. My girlfriend was afraid to visit my
    place.

    I spent a third to a fourth of what many of my class-mates did, and
    yet, in comparison with the people around me, I spent lavishly. The
    building I lived in was occupied mainly by Asian immigrants, most of
    whom spoke little English. One of them was a little old Chinese lady
    named Lisa who’d lived in the same rent-stabilized apartment for
    decades. Every time she’d see me with a cut of meat, or vegetables,
    or a new appliance, she’d ask, “How much?” and no matter what number
    I gave her, she’d shout “OHHHHH!” and shrink as if burned. It wasn’t
    an act — she legitimately could not believe someone would pay $7-10
    for a loaf of bread. She shopped conscientiously, at farmers markets
    and Chinese grocery stores, and did not buy luxuries she did not need.

    And why was I spending $7-10 on a loaf of bread? Because I had money
    for the first time, the store was more attractive than my
    neighborhood bodegas, the bread tasted better, and it looked more
    attractive. But the most important reason was: what did I care?
    Money was cheap to me. Spending wasn’t taboo. Why did Lisa find that
    price obscene? Because money was expensive to her, and a purchase
    was a serious issue. If her store charged her $7 for bread, she
    wouldn’t buy it, no matter how much money she had.

    My demographic’s willingness to spend more than we strictly needed
    raised the prices of bars, coffee shops, grocery stores in our city
    — almost every service, I imagine, was affected. The increases in
    costs were passed on to the residents of our city, many of whom were
    neither as wealthy as my demographic, nor as willing to hunt for
    bargains as people like Lisa. My demographic upped the supply of
    high-priced goods at the expense of low-priced goods, and, perhaps
    as importantly, shifted our social circles’ cultures (which included
    many non-CS college grads) to be more expectant of luxury spending.
    All the programmers could afford expensive apartments and expensive
    goods, and it seems to me that all the non-programmers just paid out
    the nose for those things anyways.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
87.
    Ilya Shpitser says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:26 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465477>
    ~new~

    edit: did not reply to an appropriate post, I meant to reply to the
    post comparing spending to CPU use in a program.

    —

    The issue with this metaphor is 100% CPU-utilization of a computer
    program is sort of a rough analogue of a “zero saving” society —
    money _has_ to go somewhere, the only question is where. But that’s
    not how people treat money.

    Why are efficiency gains eaten by other sectors? There is probably
    some sort of law operating. What is that law?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        aireq85 says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:14 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465509>
        ~new~

        (I wrote the CPU comment, found some errors, deleted it, fixed
        the errors, and re-posted it (it is now below this comment). I
        was all so quick I never though anyone would find the time to
        read it, much less reply to it.)

        A substantial amount of ‘savings’ are really just ‘lending for
        others to spend’ (though the causal chain is a bit complex), so
        money usually does not exit the system. And even though people
        can save money, they cannot save their own time. So it is a bit
        like CPU time, and the unemployed are akin to an idle CPU.

        As for your (very good) question:

            Why are efficiency gains eaten by other sectors? There is
            probably some sort of law operating. What is that law?

        It seems that we used to spend all these resources on some other
        tasks (lets say manufacturing), and when these resources were no
        longer needed in manufacturing, we just moved then for other
        areas, lets say education, where they could be used, even though
        they added very little marginal value.

        So efficiency gains in manufacturing, translate into
        productivity losses in Education (as new entries add little
        marginal value).

        In CPU land, task A gets more CPU time, but it really has not
        much use for it, so it does little more than heating the CPU.
        Perhaps one could argue that would be better to leave the CPU
        idle then. Or find new useful tasks to do.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465477>
88.
    aireq85 says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:28 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465479>
    ~new~

    There is a strange analogue for this problem in CS, and it goes as
    follows:
    Let’s say we have a slow process somewhere, someone profiles it and
    finds that the process spends 20% of its time on task A, and 80% on
    task B.
    The person then proceeds to optimize task B, and is able to achieve
    a 4x speedup.
    The process is profiled again, and now we find that it spends 50% of
    its time on task A and the other 50% on task B.

    At first sight some people find this surprising, in the sense that
    they would expect to see a 4x reduction in task B, and no difference
    in task A (even though that would not add up to 100%).
    A good way to visualize what is happening is to think about what the
    process can do in 10 ‘time units’.

    Before the optimization it was doing:

    |ABBBB ABBBB (20% Task A; 80% Task B)|

    After the optimization it is doing:

    |AB AB AB AB AB (50% Task A; 50 Task B)|

    So before the process only did 2 “cycles of work” in 10 time units,
    now does 5 “cycles of work”.

    Moving to a cartoonish version of the real world. In 1970 we spent
    20% of our economic resources on education and 80% on manufacturing.
    In the meanwhile we improved manufacturing efficiency by 4x.
    We go and look at how we spend our resources, and to our surprise we
    find that we now spend 50% on Education and 50% on Manufacturing.

    So strangely enough it seems that the economy is behaving a bit like
    a CPU.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
89.
    Jiro says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:30 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465481>
    ~new~

    Summary:

    1) Lots of replies trying to explain the phenomenon
    2) Occasiona replies trying to rebut the claim that the phenomenon
    exists.

    And 2) gets lost in the noise, even though with 2) there is no need
    for 1).

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
90.
    sclmlw says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:41 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465486>
    ~new~

    It’s important to distinguish between lifespan and life expectancy.
    Too often people conflate a life expectancy of, say 42 in some
    developing country, as meaning most people die before they reach the
    age of 50. More often, that means lots of babies dying, and people
    otherwise living to old age. As an average, life expectancy is
    significantly impacted by anything that reduces infant/child
    mortality. When large numbers of infants and children are dying
    right after birth, even small improvements in neonatal care can
    dramatically improve life expectancy. (Which explains dramatic gains
    in life expectancy as nations rising out of poverty devote more
    resources to neonatal care.) However this does not necessarily
    increase lifespan. In developed nations with low infant and child
    mortality, it’s unreasonable to expect the kind of increases in life
    expectancy we saw when we health improvements were attacking the fat
    left tail of the distribution. That right tail of life expectancy –
    old age – remains as elusive as it was in the 1930’s, it seems.

    Additionally, the US calculates child mortality differently from
    other nations (last I checked, we’re more generous in reporting
    neonatal fatalities as live births than most countries); this could
    be part of why the US lags behind the rest of the world in life
    expectancy but does much better on many measures of health CARE
    outcomes, such as 10-year cancer survival rates (better than most –
    if not all – countries). Of course, multiple causes are probably at
    work here, including behavioral issues such as our increased rates
    of obesity, smoking, and murder/suicide than other countries.
    Because of the large number of significant confounders – and the
    nature of the statistic itself – I’m wary of relying heavily on life
    expectancy to project quality of health care.

    But health care might help us understand the underlying question of
    why costs are increasing in some sectors. For example, rates of
    asthma, allergy, inflammatory bowel disease, TIIDM, and a host of
    other diseases are much higher (especially in the US) than they were
    in the 1960’s. To reverse Scott’s thought experiment, how would the
    health care systems of the 1960’s handle their populations if they
    had to treat today’s rates of asthma, obesity, cancer, depression,
    etc? How much of the increase in health costs is driven by increases
    in chronic disease?

    And on a related note, perhaps when people can buy a new cell phone
    for $100, they choose to spend their extra money, not on more health
    care directly, but on unhealthy behaviors, knowing (hoping?) their
    doctor will be able to treat the resulting sequelae. In other words,
    could technology improvements be driving changes in behavior, which
    drives increased costs, as a revealed preference for
    sloth/irresponsible behaviors that we’re “buying” with more health
    care spending?

    Not sure how this might relate to the other cost diseases discussed
    in this post. My field is health care and biomedical research.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
91.
    Jon S says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:48 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465491>
    ~new~

    Is tipping culture a similar phenomenon? In the US (particularly in
    big cities), standard tipping percentages have ratcheted up steadily
    over time. Everyone wants to be a good tipper, so the new standard
    becomes their minimum, and so on. How much does that happen in other
    countries with tipping?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
92.
    stucchio says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:50 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465492>
    ~new~

    I’ve thought about these issues. I agree that in some sectors
    (particularly education and transit), this is a real issue.

    But overall I don’t think this theory holds up. I’m going to use
    some basic identities to Feynman this theory.

    Stylized fact 1: Income has remained flat after adjusting for
    chained CPI.

    Stylized fact 2: costs have gone way up adjusting for chained CPI.

    Conclusion: Consumption must have gone down, since consumption =
    Income/Cost.

    The problem is that this simply hasn’t happened. People live in
    bigger homes. They visit the doctor more, and have all sorts of
    medical procedures that didn’t exist in the past. More people are
    attending college and receiving degrees than ever before. People
    just have more of everything.

    If you want to argue with this point, I challenge you: find a major
    category of consumption that has gone down in material terms over a
    long period of time. The most I can think of is obsolete goods like
    land lines, or inferior goods like homed cooked meals (relative to
    restaurant meals).

    That’s exactly the opposite of what this theory predicts! Therefore,
    although I can’t identify exactly where things go wrong, they must
    go wrong somewhere.

    I will suggest a variety of possible explanations. First, chained
    CPI is not the same thing as long term inflation because the basket
    of goods changes over time.

    I.e., year 0: food costs $1, medicine costs $1.

    Year 1: Food costs $1.00, medicine costs $1.00. 10% inflation. Also
    “super medicine” is invented (costing $1) and is added to the basket
    of goods.

    Year 2: Food costs $1, medicine costs $1, super medicine costs
    $1.60. Inflation (over year 2) is 20%.

    So chained CPI says inflation from year 0 to year 2 is 10%. But in
    reality, prices of goods which existed in year 0 have remained the
    same. This is exactly what has happened in medicine.

    A second explanation is that most of the major categories of goods
    which experience large cost increases are not hedonically adjusted.
    Medicine is a great example. I spent 1,40,000 rupees on spine
    surgery, but I’d have been happy to pay $140,000 for it. In 1970 I’d
    have spent $100 on painkillers and been told I’ll stay in bed for
    the rest of my life. This is NOT inflation – I’m spending a lot more
    money for a much better thing. But CPI treats this as 140,000%
    inflation.

    In short, I can’t identify where this post goes wrong. But simple
    arithmetic identities do demonstrate that it does go wrong somewhere.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Eponymous says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:04 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465589>
        ~new~

        Income has gone up. It’s just median income that hasn’t.

        Also there have been large decreases in the relative costs of
        many other types of goods (like clothing, manufactured goods,
        etc). Basically anything made in a sweatshop overseas or by
        robots in a factory.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465492>
          o
            stucchio says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:09 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465594>
            ~new~

            If you’re right, you should be able to come up with some
            goods or services that the median consumer has less of. What
            are those goods or services?

            Would you be willing to trade in the 2005 basket of goods
            consumed by the median person (or the 20’th percentile
            person, or whateveR) in return for the 1975 basket? I sure
            wouldn’t. Among other things the 2005 basket includes a
            medical treatment that allows me to walk…

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465589>
      *
        Uncorrelated says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 10:24 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466211>
        ~new~

        This may be too far down the thread and too long after the post
        to matter, but …

        There are a few things which come to mind which would need to be
        taken into account in an analysis of your sort. 1) In PK-12
        education most people have their kids in public school so that
        cost doesn’t come from their income. 2) In health care most of
        most people’s bills are paid by employer provided health
        insurance which also mostly doesn’t come from their income; at
        least the way we measure it. 3) Supposedly there is an increase
        lately in adult children living with their parents. This may be
        evidence of a reduction in consumption of housing.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465492>
93.
    johnmcg says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 12:56 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465498>
    ~new~

    My theory is that there has been scope creep for these industries
    that is justified by a kind or moral blackmail against their core
    mission.

    Tell people they should pay more so that a university can invite
    Milo and resemble a resort, and people won’t do it. Tell people they
    need to support “education” and they’re all in. If you’re a person
    who wanted to run a resort, what’s a better way to ensure a steady
    stream of income? Tie your fortunes to the vagaries of the market?
    Or to people’s commitment to spend money on education? Why not
    attach yourself to an educational institution and assert that what
    you do is necessary to prevent the next generation from falling behind?

    I think this scope creep is also partly explained by the trend of
    the last several years of double-income households. Maybe people
    wouldn’t pay $5000 for the delta in education test scores from 1965
    to today. But maybe they would accept the freedom to pursue a
    career, earn their own paycheck, and leave their marriage without
    plunging their family into financial peril. So the schools end up
    doing things that stay-at-home parents used to do.

    —

    Reading the anecdotes about private rooms in hospitals, it strikes
    me that this is the opposite of the trend we’re seeing in airline
    travel. There, the complaint is that the “base price” pays for less
    and less, and you need to pay extra to check a bag, carry a bag,
    have a reasonable amount of leg room, etc.

    Analysis blames the customers — we’re not willing to pay for extras,
    and airlines have responded.

    Maybe the difference is price transparency — we see the numbers, and
    feel like paying extra for more comfort is an indulgence.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
94.
    aristides says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:00 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465502>
    ~new~

        I’m not sure how many people currently opposed to paying for
        free health care, or free college, or whatever, would be happy
        to pay for health care that cost less, that was less wasteful
        and more efficient, and whose price we expected to go down
        rather than up with every passing year. I expect it would be a lot.

    You can consider me one of those people. I had only identified the
    education cost disease, and had attributed it to the government loan
    program. I figured that students would pay whatever they could to go
    to the college they wanted, and discounted how expensive the loans
    are, but the picture looks more complicated. I’m not in favor of
    free education at the current rate, but I would consider it at the
    old rates.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Incurian says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:33 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465527>
        ~new~

        For me, this generalizes. I am against government on moral
        grounds, but it would be really difficult for me to muster up
        the motivation to argue against a government with low taxes,
        excellent services, and minimal laws/regulations.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465502>
95.
    Guy says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:10 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465504>
    ~new~

    Control systems. If something is spiraling out of control despite
    efforts to curb it, likely it’s because something else is under very
    strong control and causing the spiral. Look toward what is *not*
    changing to explain what is. 40 hour work week? The quantity we base
    inflation numbers on? Zero sum status? Start from surprisingly
    unchanged quantities.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
96.
    bean says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:17 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465514>
    ~new~

    Your comments on increased medical bureaucracy and record-keeping
    are mirrored in my experience. I work in aftermarket fleet support
    at a major airline manufacturer. The project I’ve spent the past
    three and a half months on has been the result of a single finding
    on one airplane (out of two that were inspected for this problem).
    The total cost of the engineering work on it so far has probably
    been at least $200,000 in salaries alone. I expect we’ll see another
    $100,000 or so spent by us (the manufacturer) before this is all
    over. That doesn’t count the cost to the operators, who are going to
    have a new set of inspections to do every couple of years. All
    before we have any clue if this is a widespread problem or the
    result of a few hard landings by the particular plane (and there is
    some reason to suspect that might be the case).
    Looking over documents we produced 20+ years ago, they’re models of
    simplicity compared to what we do now. Half as many pages, sometimes
    less. Some of this may be computers letting us do more stuff than we
    used to be able to, some of it is that more airplanes are ending up
    overseas and in the hands of operators who have to be nagged to take
    care of them. But a lot of it is increasing paranoia about safety on
    our end. And I still can’t figure out why we went from ‘left side
    shown, right side similar’ to separate figures for each side.
    Just to be clear, we take safety very seriously, and flying is very
    safe. But as I routinely point out, if all we cared about was not
    crashing, we’d ground all of our airplanes immediately. This is very
    much a minority opinion, and nobody has yet pointed out that we
    might actually be costing net lives that way. Tradeoffs are not in
    most people’s thinking.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        habu71 says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 2:57 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465583>
        ~new~

        The same mentality exists in the nuclear world. The goal of the
        NRC and all the major players seems to be to kill (-2) people
        per year. As one would expect given its impossibility, this goal
        leads to major increases in cost.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465514>
97.
    David Condon says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:18 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465516>
    ~new~

    “But it is hard to credit school spending for the minority students’
    improvement, which occurred almost entirely during the period from
    1975-1985.”

    The National Diffusion Network began in 1974. The increase might be
    attributable to getting teachers to use evidence-based approaches to
    education more frequently.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
98.
    RomeoStevens says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:24 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465520>
    ~new~

    I’m perplexed that people are perplexed?

    1. massive wealth transfers to the elderly.
    2. demographics.
    3. Expensive but unmeasured quality of life increases such as
    household size.
    4. Keeping high trust machinery running in a low trust
    post-civilization can be arbitrarily expensive.
    5. Related to 4 and exacerbating 2: decreasing number of people
    working in wealth producing jobs.
    6. mandated quality increases, housing and car safety, etc.
    7. It is illegal to keep wealth destroying people away from fragile
    things. Babysitting while pretending it isn’t, related to 5, can be
    arbitrarily expensive depending on how much you want to dress it up.

    Someone might respond to all of this that per worker productivity is
    increasing, but my feeling is that if you teleported an economist
    from the past to today and had them look at how we are calculating
    per worker productivity they’d scream and run.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
99.
    CatCube says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:28 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465523>
    ~new~

    It doesn’t explain all of the cost (or even most of it) but for
    construction, there’s been a sea change in the safety culture that’s
    driving part of the increase.

    For example, for the construction of Hoover Dam, here’s
    <https://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/history/essays/fat1933.html> a
    list of the fatalities that occurred in 1933 on that project. Notice
    that in the first quarter of that year, they were killing a guy
    every two weeks on average. Some of them are repetitive accidents (a
    guy gets killed in a fall on 1 Jan, then a month later they have
    another fall, workers struck by trucks a month apart, etc.) On a
    modern USACE or Reclamation dam construction project, that would be
    considered /appalling/ and the accident pattern you see in that list
    could very well end up with the contractor being thrown off the
    project and their contract terminated. Certainly work would be
    stopped until they figured out how to stop the carnage. The safety
    plan that needs to be submitted prior to starting work now is of the
    same type of brain melting Lovecraftesqe bureaucratese that Deisach
    details above
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465339>.
    There’s a lot of money spent by both the contractor and the
    Government in ensuring that that the submitted plan meets the
    contract requirements, not to mention the cost of enforcing (direct
    in the purchase of PPE, and the fact that it makes things take
    longer). This is leaving aside that there might be significant costs
    to “safety” requirements that may not actually improve safety but
    are expensive to comply with nonetheless.

    From a wider view, these huge projects were often done with the
    Facebook mentality of “move fast and break things.” My go-to example
    is The Dalles Dam. The largest group impacted were the Native
    Americans, who protested that they had Celilo Falls as an important
    site for catching salmon, one of the Four Foods, and the nearby
    Celilo Village, which was the oldest inhabited site in North America
    and an important meeting site for trade and culture.

    They got told to take a lot of pictures, because all of that is
    going to be underwater.

    Now, I actually agree with the construction of the dam, in the
    improvements to power production and navigation were critical. But
    you can’t escape that a lot of the infrastructure we have was built
    without much consideration to these types of issues. People wonder
    why we can’t build high speed rail in the Northeast Corridor when we
    had an extensive rail system built there 70 years ago and new
    highways built 50 years ago? Because those things got built by
    drawing straight lines between population centers, and telling
    everybody who lived on that line “fuck you.” For better or worse,
    that’s not possible anymore. So now we spend years beating decisions
    to death, and people get paid a lot of money to argue back and forth
    beating those decisions to death.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:36 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465734>
        ~new~

        This is definitely a good explanation of why China can build
        infrastructure cheaply and efficiently, but the US can’t. But I
        don’t think it does a good job of explaining why Japan and
        France (where labor and environmental regulations are much more
        comparable to the US, if not more stringent) can do it so much
        more cheaply.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465523>
      *
        Steve Sailer says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 4:46 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465882>
        ~new~

        William Mulholland built the Hollywood Reservoir under the
        famous Hollywood sign in the early 1920s in about 18 months. In
        contrast, when the pedestrian walkway around the lake was
        damaged by the 2005 rains, it took until 2013 to get it fixed.

        Here are pictures:

        http://isteve.blogspot.com/2014/03/why-are-infrastructure-projects-so-slow.html

        On the other hand, Mulholland’s next dam, the St. Francis,
        collapsed in 1928, killing 600 people. So in the early 1930s, a
        huge pile of dirt was laboriously pushed in front of the
        Hollywood dam to keep Hollywood from being washed away.

        So maybe some times we have good reasons for doing things more
        slowly now?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465523>
          o
            CatCube says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 10:45 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465915>
            ~new~

            Oh, I’m not advocating going back to building dams with the
            philosophy of “moving fast and breaking things.” When I said
            that it’d be appalling to kill somebody every two weeks on a
            construction project, I was including my own feelings in that.

            As you pointed out, this is only a small part of the
            explanation. If there was one obvious cause, I think it’d
            jump out of you when you looked at the stats. As it is, I
            think it’s a combination of small factors adding up (as
            others have stated elsewhere in the thread). Some other
            small items that might be adding up: We’ve got a much better
            understanding of structural behavior, which requires more
            analysis. For example, we know a lot more about how
            earthquakes affect structures, and the design requires a lot
            more effort now; it’s just /really complex/ to model seismic
            loading, and for large structures it costs quite a bit of
            money; for small structures you just use a simple method
            that will overdesign, but the big projects are worth a more
            extensive effort that adds a few percent to your design
            cost. Then, construction is more expensive because of the
            more complex detailing of e.g., connections. To touch on
            that a little bit, the design of connections is much better
            now–for example, old structures will have welds from three
            directions intersecting, because they didn’t realize /how
            bad an idea that is/–but many of these improvements require
            more extensive design, fabrication, and construction effort.
            For example, avoiding intersecting welds requires weld
            access holes which are fiddly to construct properly, but you
            also don’t have welds failing without warning, especially in
            fatigue conditions.

            This is in addition to the featherbedding, permitting, etc.,
            noted elsewhere, but it all adds up.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465882>
              +
                Steve Sailer says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 5:39 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466183>
                ~new~

                Any thoughts on the huge Oroville Dam north of
                Sacramento in Gold Rush country that will likely need
                hundreds of millions of dollars in repairs after the
                concrete spillway pretty much exploded under heavy (but
                not overwhelming) outflow?

                I don’t know if there are any general lessons to be
                learned. But the body language of the public works
                engineers suggests some guilt and fear on their part.
                California was pretty broke a half decade ago, but could
                have afforded to fix the spillway recently if flaws in
                it had been discovered, but the staffers didn’t seem to
                inspect it terribly closely.

                I wonder if the quality of public works engineers has
                declined as we’ve moved from the construction to the
                maintenance era. Fifty to 100 years ago, building dams
                was a highly prestigious profession. But few dams have
                been built in this century and mostly we just want the
                ones that we already have not to collapse. That’s not
                particularly attractive to top people looking for a career.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465915>
                  #
                    The Nybbler says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 10:35 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466212>
                    ~new~

                    $100 million now seems cheap to replace an entire
                    spillway. I think living in the NYC area (where $1M
                    is the price of a parking spot) has completely
                    desensitized me to these kinds of costs; if it’s
                    less than $1B I figure they got off easy.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466183>
                  #
                    CatCube says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:16 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466321>
                    ~new~

                    I’m going to preface this with I have no inside
                    knowledge about Oroville or access to the designs.
                    The only thing I’m basing this off of is public news
                    stories, which could easily be missing important
                    information, and discussions with a more experienced
                    structural engineer.

                    My best guess was a problem with the foundation
                    drains. Them being stopped completely could cause
                    issues, but the most likely here is that the filter
                    on the drains blew out, allowing piping to occur.
                    You need to drain the foundation under dams and
                    appurtenant structures, because the water pressure
                    due to the forebay will exert a large uplift. By
                    using drains, you reduce the pressure at the drains
                    to atmosphere, but water is necessarily flowing out.

                    Water flowing through soil can be modeled as flowing
                    through little pipes. Just like in actual pipes,
                    given a specific pressure smaller pore sizes will
                    result in slower flows, and larger pores will result
                    in faster flows. (Longer pipes of the same size will
                    flow slower than shorter) A soil particle of a given
                    size will be displaced under a certain critical
                    flow; small particles take slow flows and larger
                    particles faster. So what can happen is that water
                    is flowing through the soil fast enough to displace
                    small grains. Now that the small grains are gone,
                    the pores are a little larger so water flows faster.
                    The faster water can then displace larger grains,
                    which increases the pore size again, until it opens
                    a large hole which flows fast enough to wash away
                    all the soil. This mode of failure is called piping.
                    It’s worth noting that this can happen /fast/. The
                    Teton Dam failure in Idaho had the first clear
                    indication of piping–muddy water flowing at the
                    right groin of the dam–noticed at about 07:30; the
                    dam failed at 11:45, killing 14 people. There were
                    some clear flows coming out of the soil below the
                    dam a few days prior to the failure, but those
                    aren’t all that uncommon at a dam and need to be
                    monitored, but aren’t usually a big concern without
                    seeing other evidence (such as cloudy water
                    indicating soil mobilization).

                    So, to go back to Oroville, you need to have drains,
                    but water flowing in the drains can cause the soil
                    to pipe and wash away. So you use a filter material
                    around the drains to prevent the small grains from
                    being washed out. If this filter fails, the soil
                    gets washed out through the drain and opens a void,
                    eventually the void is big enough that part of the
                    slab above collapses.

                    One of the big issues in designing a spillway is the
                    dissipation of energy–the energy of the flowing
                    water is extremely violent and if you don’t control
                    what happens to it, it’ll eat everything. If I’m
                    right about the drains allowing a slab to partially
                    collapse, this then created a huge irregularity in
                    the flow of the spillway, and churning water then
                    started dissipating energy /right there/, which
                    eroded the concrete and the soil underneath it.
                    (Once the hole started opening up, there’s
                    absolutely no way to stop it from getting bigger
                    short of simply to stop using the spillway; anything
                    to block or redirect the flow would just make the
                    problem worse.)

                    An alternate possibility, that I like less after
                    sleeping on it, is that the foundation drains were
                    blocked, causing the slab to heave upwards a bit and
                    creating a flow irregularity that started erosion.

                    There are other possibilities, but I think these are
                    the most likely. I haven’t had an opportunity to
                    talk to a hydraulic engineer to shoot the breeze
                    about what they think, so they could also come up
                    with something from their side.

                    As far as the state engineers seeming embarrassed,
                    that’s easily explainable by the fact that they have
                    a gaping hole in their spillway. Even if they didn’t
                    actually do anything wrong, until they know for sure
                    what happened they’ve got to be asking themselves,
                    “Did I miss something?”

                    I’ll admit, that I could see myself missing the
                    problem here. You don’t have enough time or money to
                    inspect everything, so you focus on where you think
                    problems will occur. I’d have expected problems to
                    happen near the gates, where you have large loads on
                    the piers from the gates and where water is first
                    flowing in and will be churning a lot, or near the
                    end of the spillway where the flip buckets would be
                    susceptible to a lot of erosion. I’d have only given
                    the chute, where water is mostly flowing in a sheet,
                    the once-over to see if anything jumped out at me,
                    but probably wouldn’t have spent a lot of time on it.

                    Edit: I forgot to engage your last musing, about the
                    quality of engineers in government service declining
                    on average. I think you’re probably right. Not only
                    because of maintenance being less sexy, but also the
                    bureaucratic hassle of modern construction. During
                    the era of major dam construction, those guys were
                    limited by their budget, their imagination, and the
                    laws of physics; they could go “Look on my works, ye
                    mighty, and despair!” Now you spend more of your
                    time shepherding everything through interminable
                    processes. Instead of civil engineering, maybe they
                    go work for a tech company.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466183>
                  #
                    CatCube says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:58 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466406>
                    ~new~

                    Now they’re ordering an evacuation because they are
                    in danger of losing the pool. I’ve not watched any
                    video, only read news stories, but to take your word
                    for it that they displayed body language showing
                    “guilt or fear”: if they had an inkling that
                    headcutting or undermining of the auxiliary spillway
                    was possible and didn’t tell the public that days
                    ago, that’s appalling and people should be fired.
                    They also should have been releasing water through
                    the main spillway at full tilt in previous days, and
                    accepted the loss of the chute, since there was no
                    danger to the main spillway monoliths.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466183>
                  #
                    Steve Sailer says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:36 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466525>
                    ~new~

                    Thank you, CatCube.

                    Steve

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466183>
      *
        Steve Sailer says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 4:54 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465884>
        ~new~

        A water main built by William Mulholland (and fictionalized in
        the movie “Chinatown”) in 1915 that runs near my house in the
        San Fernando Valley is being augmented by a parallel water main
        a half mile away. The original was built by men and mules in
        about 18 months. The replacement water main project has been
        underway for approaching ten years now.

        The street near my house has been used to park enormous
        earthmoving equipment for several years now. The Department of
        Water and Power evidently doesn’t want to pay over time for
        workers, so the millions of dollars of machinery are only used a
        maximum of 40 out of the 168 hours in each week.

        Could this be part of Baumol’s Cost Disease: as we get richer,
        perhaps we use capital equipment such as steamshovels less
        intensively?

        I imagine the first ever steamshovel was probably used close to
        around the clock. But now we have a lot of them sitting around,
        so they sit around unused a lot of each week.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465523>
          o
            John Schilling says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 11:35 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465923>
            ~new~

                Could this be part of Baumol’s Cost Disease: as we get
                richer, perhaps we use capital equipment such as
                steamshovels less intensively?

                I imagine the first ever steamshovel was probably used
                close to around the clock. But now we have a lot of them
                sitting around, so they sit around unused a lot of each
                week.

            Intuitively, using the steam shovel 120 hours/week instead
            of 40 means that you get three times as much work done each
            week but have to replace three times as many worn-out steam
            shovels every year at the steady-state equilibrium. So the
            cost savings would be limited to the time-value-of-money
            gain at startup (or incremental expansion), when you get
            some number of years of “free” use out of the lot of
            brand-new steam shovels you just bought and of which none
            will wear out for X years even used around the clock.

            Not sure what the value of X is for steam shovels. For
            airliners it seems to be about 20 years, and the airline
            industry does use airliners pretty much around the clock
            (~50% actual flying time, plus turnaround and maintenance),
            so there’s obviously gain to be had. I’m skeptical that
            uncaptured duty-cycle gain is going to be a big part of the
            cost disease.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465884>
              +
                CatCube says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 12:45 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465941>
                ~new~

                Other factors to consider: labor is pretty much the
                overriding factor in construction these days, where in
                past years it was materials/capital. Aircraft have a
                much higher unit cost/operator salary ratio than a HYEX.
                Spending the money on salaries to keep a piece of
                construction equipment running around the clock may not
                pay in the same way that keeping a
                several-hundred-million dollar aircraft moving would.

                The logistics of keeping them running are also
                different. Two or three shifts on a construction project
                get expensive quickly. Night shifts are less safe, due
                to less light and workers operating outside of their
                circadian rhythm. You’ve also got to have owner’s
                quality assurance reps on site for three shifts or the
                dumb nonsense they’re looking out for will just happen
                at night. Pulling three shifts (or even one shift at
                night) doesn’t usually pencil out except in exceptional
                circumstances. Most owners won’t pay 1.5× the cost to
                have the job completed in 1/3 the time in most
                cases.Since the job won’t be operating for 24 hours,
                you’d have to shift the equipment to other jobs to keep
                it fully utilized. The costs of moving it would eat the
                advantages pretty quickly.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465923>
              +
                citizencokane <http://citizencokane.wordpress.com> says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 3:02 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465981>
                ~new~

                For some capital goods, though, the physical
                depreciation of the machine is a strict function of time
                rather than intensity of use…especially if they are
                letting their machines sit outside in the rain and cold
                all the time. Oh wait, you’re talking about California.
                Nevermind.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465923>
              +
                Incurian says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 3:05 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465984>
                ~new~

                    Intuitively, using the steam shovel 120 hours/week
                    instead of 40 means that you get three times as much
                    work done each week but have to replace three times
                    as many worn-out steam shovels every year at the
                    steady-state equilibrium. So the cost savings would
                    be limited to the time-value-of-money gain at startup…

                I assume I’m missing something here because you seem
                smarter than me, but:

                If the value of the labor of a steam shovel is
                substantially greater than the cost of the steam shovel,
                doesn’t that make it worth it to run it 24/7? If my
                steam shovel costs $1 but it can finish $1M projects in
                a day as opposed to a year… wouldn’t you work that thing
                to death and just eat the $1 every time it wears out?

                Is it that the actual numbers involved are not that
                extreme, or is the some other factor I’m not considering?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465923>
                  #
                    John Schilling says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 7:45 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466058>
                    ~new~

                    If it’s only $1, wouldn’t I buy one steam shovel per
                    work site and as soon as the workers say “now we’re
                    off-shift and you have to pay me $30/hr instead of
                    20 to run the steam shovel”, send them home and
                    leave the steam shovel idle?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465984>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 10:17 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466113>
                    ~new~

                    $30/hour is still really low compared to getting $1M
                    twice as fast. Is that what you meant by time-value
                    of money? My understanding of that is that when
                    comparing two equal paydays, the earlier one is
                    better. But this isn’t just about getting a payday
                    earlier, you’re getting more total paydays because
                    you can do more projects each year.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465984>
                  #
                    John Schilling says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 1:09 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466140>
                    ~new~

                    One can also get that million dollars twice as fast
                    by buying two steam shovels and running them both
                    single-shift on $20/hour labor. Two steam shovels
                    cost twice as much as one, but they wear out half as
                    fast so that’s a wash in the long run – number of
                    steam shovels worn out per construction project is
                    essentially a constant.

                    “Time value of money” comes from the fact that you
                    pay for steam shovels up front and the savings for
                    not having to replace them as often don’t
                    materialize until later. That’s not a trivial
                    matter. But compared to paying your work force (and
                    it will be more than just one shovel operator) 50%
                    extra to work night shift?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465984>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 1:34 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466149>
                    ~new~

                    Whoa.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465984>
100.
    Incurian says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:37 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465529>
    ~new~

    Did everybody take the day off or do you just spend a lot of your
    work time on blog comments?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Corey says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 1:56 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465541>
        ~new~

        The latter, of course, which is often floated as an explanation
        for wage/productivity divergence in office workers: part of the
        missing wages is accounted for in time spent dicking around on
        Facebook.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465529>
          o
            Anonymous Bosch says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:06 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465592>
            ~new~

                The latter, of course, which is often floated as an
                explanation for wage/productivity divergence in office
                workers: part of the missing wages is accounted for in
                time spent dicking around on Facebook.

            This theory sounds flippant but honestly it’s the best
            explanation I’ve heard that reconciles cost disease,
            productivity/wage divergence, and the missing Keynesian
            10-hour work week. David Graeber has written about it a lot.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465541>
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:33 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465660>
        ~new~

        /Did everybody take the day off or do you just spend a lot of
        your work time on blog comments?/

        Half day today! All my commenting done virtuously at home on my
        own time (this is my idea of a wild and crazy fun time for the
        weekend) 🙂

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465529>
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:37 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465737>
        ~new~

        I’m at work, but currently engaged in porting a codebase of a
        couple million lines of code from Windows/Xbox/PS4 to Linux.
        It’s work that involves a lot of “hurry up and wait” in the form
        of making a two line change, then kicking off a ten minute
        compile job <https://xkcd.com/303/> to see what will break and
        necessitate the next two line change.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465529>
          o
            Incurian says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 6:47 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465749>
            ~new~

            “Oh man, I’m totally gonna reply with that one xkcd comic…
            that clever bastard!”

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465737>
101.
    Matt Corbett says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 1:38 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465532>
    ~new~

    Another way to look at this problem is that there are 3 salient
    features of these sectors: 1) Rapidly increasing prices 2)
    stagnating individual wages within the sector and 3) no obvious
    massive pool of profits being received by anyone. By economic
    theory, the only way to square that circle is declining
    productivity. That’s been Cowen’s default answer to the conundrum
    (and a sensible one, given that he is an economist). An important
    point to make about declining productivity: If your productivity is
    actually declining, but your wages are staying the same, /you are
    being increasingly overpaid/. The “declining productivity” idea
    doesn’t entirely sit well though based on anecdotal evidence. As you
    point out, Doctors, nurses, teachers, and adjunct professors would
    all dispute the idea they are working less hard than they used to.

    There are two ways “declining productivity” can manifest itself when
    many people themselves feel they are working more and harder, to the
    point of being overworked. 1) There exists somewhere a
    semi-hidden/unnoticed group of people who are doing essentially no
    valuable work but being paid like they are and 2) that a lot the
    additional/new work being done by the overworked people is
    essentially useless (“zero marginal product” in econ-parlance) or
    even net-negative by reducing the quality of the work that is
    valuable. At the anecdotal level, both of these have obvious
    examples: for 1) there is the explosion in the number of
    administrative positions in each of these sectors. For 2) think of
    your $500 psychiatric evaluation example. Another point in support
    of 2) being common: work dissatisfaction. Most people, and certainly
    most educated professionals, are happy to work quite hard if they
    feel their work is meaningful. “Not worth it anymore” is not the cry
    of someone under stress and pressure, but someone under stress and
    pressure /and not seeing any commensurate value in the result/. It’s
    an implicit admission of futility and uselessness.

    As you point out, “cost disease” is not universal or even close to
    it. In most other sectors, real costs have declined substantially,
    and productivity is obviously vastly greater. Even in sectors
    notorious for bureaucratic bloat and incompetent, horrendous service
    like airlines and cable TV, the quality per real dollar has greatly
    improved 1985-present. While it’s entirely arguable that
    productivity growth has slowed 2005-present vs 1985-2005, there’s no
    credible argument that productivity has actually decreased
    collectively.

    If declining productivity is real, but not universal and limited to
    only some sectors (albeit large, important ones), the Occam’s razor
    conclusion is should be that it is /not/ fundamentally a
    societal-level problem, i.e. that it’s not about overall human
    capital or of overall societal expectations and risk tolerances. The
    Occam’s razor conclusion should be that the problem is an
    organizational behavior problem. School systems, hospital systems,
    civic infrastructure, universities simply work in a different way
    than other sectors, /and the way they work is terrible/.
    Organizational behavior problems are mostly about internal
    incentives, where substantial numbers of people in an organization
    have a personal incentive that is harmful and contrary to the
    efficiency and health of the overall organization.

    I would bet that if you looked at say, 1965-1982, plus or minus a
    few years, you would see “Cost Disease”, just in different sectors.
    What happened to those sectors wasn’t just competition. 1980s
    deregulation played a major role, but the huge change in corporate
    organizational behavior was driven by the threat of corporate
    buyouts. In ordinary economic competition, it takes years and years
    and years for an upstart to take down an ossified, entrenched
    competitor. The threat of a corporate buyout utterly changed that
    dynamic. You didn’t even have to have an obvious competitor trying
    to take you down. If you were a public company exec overseeing a
    bloated, inefficient cost structure that produced a crappy return on
    capital, /anyone/ with a junk bond salesman’s business card could
    kick you to the curb in two months. For a fictionalized
    representation of this, go watch the Gordon Gekko “Greed is Good”
    speech from /Wall Street/:
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PF_iorX_MAw . Sure, Gekko is an
    awful person and a villain, but what he is describing is precisely
    what an organization with Cost Disease looks like. The real-life
    Gekkos fixed most of corporate America’s Cost Disease.

    That is not to say that what’s necessary to fix medicine or
    education is to sic Henry Kravis or Carl Icahn on them, but it does
    mean that the incentive structure at the top needs to change, and
    there needs to be a much greater focus on how it is these
    organizations go about operating. Given how much taxpayer money they
    consume, it’s simply not acceptable for them to demand to be free of
    political interference and have their experience and professionalism
    trusted. If the organization fails to improve, the top execs should
    be fired ostentatiously and publicly humiliated.

    IMO, there are two large items coincident with Cost Disease: large
    number of veto points and time dilation. When large numbers of
    people have veto power over anything, by law of large numbers some
    of them will convert their veto power into a rent-seeking extortion
    racket, and “buying them off” becomes just a cost of doing business.
    An important principle needs to be that anyone controlling a veto
    point has to be personally accountable for the results. If you have
    a veto, you don’t get job security. If you want job security, you
    can’t have a veto. Time dilation is, on top of being a symptom,
    actually a part of declining productivity- productivity is output
    /per unit time/. If getting something done takes twice as long as it
    used to, then in the new world half of your work has become waste.
    It can be hard to explain to someone for whom interest rate math is
    not an everyday thing, but time is really, really, crushingly
    expensive. In project finance, an 12-month delay can easily be the
    difference between a massively successful project and a bankrupt
    failure /even if the end result is identical/. In general,
    bureaucrats and people with a bureaucratic mindset have no
    conception of the costs they impose just by making people wait
    around. Anecdotally, I’ve talked with several tech types who have
    wanted to get into medical fields and the time issue is the central
    problem. It may take 12-18 months to develop a great new
    product/method, but it can take 3-4 years to get it through the
    acquisition process of hospitals and insurance companies, and no
    startup company can make it that long without revenue. It’s not the
    tangible costs that annihilate their economics but the time lag. A
    similar story on a much larger scale could probably be told about
    new drug development.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:31 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465659>
        ~new~

        For teachers, I don’t know if the non-classroom hours are taken
        into account? It’s not simply “teach six hours, go home and do
        nothing” – they have to plan lessons, correct tests, set the
        next lot of tests, correct homework (if they set homework),
        figure out if they need to talk to Johnny’s parents at the next
        parent-teacher meeting about the slippage in his grades, worry
        about the principal told them “okay, we suspended Jason on your
        say-so and now his parents have sent us a letter from their
        lawyer, there’s going to be a board of management meeting about
        this next week”, etc. as well as all the new box-ticking
        paperwork that has increased over the years.

        So it’s hard to measure productivity when these invisible hours
        aren’t counted in.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465532>
          o
            Matt Corbett says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 5:03 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465683>
            ~new~

            If anything, this would reenforce my point, not counteract
            it. If teachers are indeed having more work demands placed
            on them (entirely plausible, school-year length has
            increased over the years), but the results aren’t improving,
            this represents an outright reduction in productivity, and
            the marginal work demanded of teachers is pretty much useless.

            A basic, important principle of economics is that workers
            are not paid by input. They are paid by output. If you work
            harder but don’t produce more, you don’t get a raise. That’s
            how it is.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465659>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 6:40 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465740>
                ~new~

                It’s also an argument for expectations changing. Parents
                in the 1950s assumed that it was their own job to raise
                their children. Parents in the modern day are more
                inclined to assume that it’s the teacher’s job to raise
                their children and the parents are simply the customers
                paying for the service.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465683>
102.
    habu71 says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:06 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465546>
    ~new~

    My favorite example of ridiculous order-of-magnitude type cost
    increases is nuclear power plant construction costs. The plots from
    this paper illustrate it nicely.
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/292964046_fig6_Overnight-Construction-Cost-and-Construction-Duration-of-US-Nuclear-Reactors-Color

    Except, in the case of power plant costs, the causes – at least, for
    the increasing US costs – are quite a bit more apparent. Pre TMI, US
    costs were in line with the rest of the world’s cost. Post TMI, not
    so much. New regulatory burdens all by themselves increased the cost
    of new plants by a factor of ten. Now, this is of course not proof
    that any of the other problems that Scott mentioned are entirely –
    or even mostly – caused by increasing regulatory burdens. It does
    however, show that government institutions as awful as the NRC do
    exist, and that their effects /can/ raise costs by the amounts seen
    health care, education, etc…

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
103.
    John Schilling says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:17 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465555>
    ~new~

        Fifth, might the increased regulatory complexity happen not
        through literal regulations, but through fear of lawsuits? That
        is, might institutions add extra layers of administration and
        expense not because they’re forced to, but because they fear
        being sued if they don’t and then something goes wrong?

    This is well understood as the cause of the substantial rise in
    light airplane prices since 1970. A single-engine, four-seat Cessna
    172 cost an inflation-adjusted $77,000 in 1970. A substantially
    identical airplane cost $163,000 in 1986. And went out of production
    the next year, because people weren’t willing to pay that price.
    When congress passed laws relaxing the manufacturer’s liability for
    older airplanes, Cessna was able to reinstate production in 1996 at
    an inflation-adjusted $190,000. Today, the price seems to literally
    be “if you have to ask, you can’t afford it”; the manufacturer only
    advertises fleet sales, but I’d estimate about $400,000 (of which
    ~$100K is fancy electronics that didn’t exist in 1986 and weren’t
    standard in 1996).

    In this case it is particularly easy to pull out the
    lawsuit/liability effect because there aren’t many cofounders. The
    1986 Cessna is so little changed from the 1970 model that they sell
    at about the same price on the used market when controlled for
    condition and total flight time. And fear of lawsuits didn’t
    manifest as safety enhancements of inscrutable cost and value,
    because light airplane crashes are almost always due to Stupid Pilot
    Tricks and almost everything that a manufacturer could do to
    mitigate that (e.g. tricycle landing gear) was standard in 1970. But
    the manufacturers still get sued, and have to pay millions, so
    there’s nothing to be done but pay for liability insurance. And,
    second-order effect, cut production when your customers start
    balking at the increased prices, so you have to amortize the fixed
    costs of actually building airplanes over a smaller sales volume.

    So, a doubling in price over fifteen or so years, a quadrupling over
    fifty years in spite of Congress noticing the problem and trying to
    mitigate it, attributable to safety/liability concerns but not
    resulting in actual safety improvements. I have no trouble believing
    something similar is happening in other industries but is harder to
    discern because too many other things are happening at the same time.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
104.
    baconbacon says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:21 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465559>
    ~new~

    Just a comment on the teacher’s pay section: Public sector unions
    frequently bargain hard for more benefits for two reasons. One is
    that they can then argue the case that they are underpaid with
    graphs that show flat wages but leave benefits out, and the other is
    that public officials will often happily trade future obligations
    for current concessions because their accounting is often set up so
    that taxes don’t have to rise much in the short term to “pay” for them.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
105.
    petealexharris says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:28 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465566>
    ~new~

    I’m inclined to ask, does *nobody* know what the money is being
    spent on?

    Say you make two pie charts for breakdown of cost for subway
    construction, college, health care, whatever. One for 1970, one for
    now. See which slices have grown relatively bigger over time. The
    fact that I think that’s a fairly obvious place to start looking
    probably means I don’t know enough about economics. 🙁

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:46 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465748>
        ~new~

        I’d suggest it’s more that you don’t appreciate how good
        rent-seekers are at hiding their rents. 🙂

        If a single line item in a budget suddenly explodes out of
        proportion, it will be investigated and people will be looking
        for something to cut. But if lots of individual line items
        slowly grow over time, a lot of money can be siphoned off
        without showing an obvious and simple cause. This is what’s
        happening in the named industries, for the most part; if you
        look at education, for example, no single line item (teacher
        salaries, administrator salaries, facility costs, etc) has
        exploded out of proportion to the others compared to what it was
        in 1960. But /all/ of these items are orders of magnitude more
        than what they were back then.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465566>
106.
    robotpliers says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:40 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465572>
    ~new~

    I don’t have time to give the full explanation here, but this is all
    due to stealth protectionism that results from the triangle trade
    between opec, China, and the US and the ensuing Red Queens Race of
    elite competition that funnels money to the top of the economy.
    Stirling Newberry explained it over a decade ago, but either no one
    understood or no one cared. I suggest reading his old DKos diaries
    from 2005 and 2006 to get a fuller picture:
    http://m.dailykos.com/blog/Stirling%20Newberry

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
107.
    spencerengland says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:40 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465573>
    ~new~

    Your comment on we are still working a 40 hour week is incorrect.

    The BLS data shows that the average workweek in services is now 32.4
    and for all private employees it is 33.6.

    The good sector of the economy is still working a 40 hour week, but
    the goods share of employment has been steadily falling for decades.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
108.
    spencerengland says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 2:42 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465575>
    ~new~

    I’m in my 70s and my wife recently had hip replacement surgery.

    In talking to nurses at the hospital hardly any of them worked a 40
    hour week.
    The more typical pattern or norm was 36 hours in four (4) days.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
109.
    Eponymous says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:01 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465586>
    ~new~

    It’s important to distinguish the house prices and public works
    stuff (probably mainly regulation related) from the prices of
    various services (Education, healthcare, etc).

    The latter is classic Baumol Cost Disease, and it’s pretty
    straightforward to explain. We’ve had a huge relative decline in the
    price of many manufactured goods (due to globalization and
    productivity gains). Simultaneously, there’s been little increase in
    productivity in service fields where the bottleneck is man-hours.
    This includes things like gardeners and barbers, which we don’t
    worry about too much (because wages of low-skill workers have
    stagnated). But it also includes things like education and medicine,
    where the workers are highly skilled (doctors, nurses, professors,
    teachers, etc).

    Since skilled labor has become relatively more expensive over time,
    the result is a large increase in the relative price of the output
    of these sectors. Also, demand for these sectors’ output is probably
    fairly inelastic for various reasons (like health insurance,
    subsidies, and the education tournament, itself driven by high
    returns to schooling, which may be mostly signaling).

    I’m not saying this is a good and efficient outcome — the salaries
    of managers and lawyers is going up too, and somebody is paying for
    the cost of the regulatory state. And maybe a lot of the smart
    people working in academia are wasting their time setting IQ proxt
    tests for kids. But I think you’re wrong to think things are worse
    than the GDP numbers indicate.

    Admittedly, I’m not sure how this squares with the numbers you give
    above for salaries of educators and doctors. At this point, I’m just
    going to deny the data, since it contradicts what I’ve heard and
    read from economists working on these questions. I have some
    hypotheses about what might be going on. A good start would be
    tracking down a breakdown of the costs of a large university or
    hospital. I think you’ll find it’s mostly personnel costs, driven by
    doctors/faculty.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        cassander says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:05 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465591>
        ~new~

        >Admittedly, I’m not sure how this squares with the numbers you
        give above for salaries of educators and doctors.

        For at least teachers, the data quoted is just wages, not wages
        and benefits, and benefits are a large part of their
        compensation. Two, the number of teachers has increased
        dramatically relative to the number of students. To re-state
        Baumol, we’re not just paying our string quartet more, we’re
        hiring a whole set of understudies and some people to administer
        them.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465586>
110.
    Aevylmar says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:12 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465596>
    ~new~

    I don’t actually think of this as something extraordinary, but then
    I may have a different worldview from most people reading this.

    In my worldview, the “normal thing” is that any organization
    consisting of people will, over time, grow more and more inefficient
    and incompetent, suffering from mission drift, parasitism, and
    simply the loss of the driving will of the people who founded it. It
    will slowly burn through the established capital that lets it
    function and eventually get taken down by newer, more efficient,
    predators, who compete among themselves for the chance to be the one
    who replace the old, established system – and then go through the
    same process, becoming established and starting the slide into
    decay. Ibn Khaldun’s theory.

    The things Scott is looking at are things where an Ordered Way Of
    Doing Things has been established by Organizations In Charge Of
    Ordering Things; the AMA was incorporated in 1893 and founded about
    fifty years before, the basic format of building codes to 1905, the
    Department of Education as part of the government to ’67 and the
    public school system was, per Wikipedia, fully established by the
    30s. It’s no surprise they’re showing strain, given that anyone who
    was an adult when they were founded is long since dead. But since
    the US government is propping them up, and the US government is
    showing few signs of disappearing any time soon, they’re allowed to
    keep growing less efficient without being competed out of existence.
    We’d logically expect them to be inefficient, just as a result of age.

    The interesting thing about this theory, to me, is that it doesn’t
    explain colleges. Businesses are allowed to select for employees
    without considering college employment; they’ve just been using
    college employment as a proxy for competence, and there’s no reason
    they have to do so. If this theory is true, you’d expect the old
    established colleges to start getting outcompeted by places like
    Codeacademy – for programming – or five-dollar Kindles – for, say,
    history – with the result that the system of “go to college, get a
    degree in anything, get a job” will stop, which itself will have the
    result that either the “traditional college system” bubble will
    collapse soon as nimbler competitors cut it to pieces, or the
    government will step in to stop the bubble from bursting.

    So that provides me with a test for my worldview. Hopefully I
    haven’t missed too many confounders.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        cassander says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:24 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465606>
        ~new~

        A college degree might have some value and still not be worth
        its cost. e.g. if the degree costs 100k, but provides 10k in
        value to an employer, it’s worth it for every employer to hire
        only grads but society as a whole comes out 90k behind. And
        since the cost isn’t paid by consumers, they have an incentive
        to go to the 100k school that gives 10k in value over the 5k
        code academy that give 5k in value.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465596>
          o
            Eponymous says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 3:47 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465627>
            ~new~

            In your example, people would choose to skip college and
            then offer to work for 15k less than people with college
            degrees, and the companies should hire them.

            The important part of the story is that education may play
            an important signaling role. i.e. it might provide 10k in
            direct value (in higher productivity), but successful
            completion of college might *signal* that one is worth 150k
            (on average) than someone who doesn’t cut it.

            Then it’s rational for students to go to college, and for
            companies to hire people who went to college. This outcome
            might even be better for society than having no filtering
            system (if that means inefficiency in sorting people between
            careers), hough it’s second-best relative to a more
            efficient screening system.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465606>
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:56 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465753>
        ~new~

            If this theory is true, you’d expect the old established
            colleges to start getting outcompeted by places like
            Codeacademy…

        They /are/ facing this kind of competition in the tech world.
        There’s still definitely a strong cultural bias in some
        institutions towards people with formal computer science
        degrees, and for certain jobs in tech, I would agree that it’s
        entirely merited. (If you need to design new algorithms, you
        either need to be a mathematical prodigy or you’re going to need
        the foundation that a traditional computer science education
        gives you.) But a reasonable number of our line-level
        programmers in technology companies are people without degrees.
        (Note that this is much less pronounced in non-technology
        companies that employ programmers, though; bias in favor of
        higher education tends to be much stronger in non-technical
        hiring managers.)

        But there’s a key difference between technology and many other
        industries: it’s fairly easy for us to sit a person down, give
        them a hands-on test and assess whether or not they have the
        necessary thought process and skills to be a competent
        programmer in a few hours. And this test is sufficiently
        clearly-related to the job function that it can pass a “business
        necessity <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disparate_impact>” test
        in a court. Many industries don’t have this advantage, and the
        college degree is the best proxy they have.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465596>
          o
            grendelkhan says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:38 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465881>
            ~new~

                But there’s a key difference between technology and many
                other industries: it’s fairly easy for us to sit a
                person down, give them a hands-on test and assess
                whether or not they have the necessary thought process
                and skills to be a competent programmer in a few hours.

            Speaking as someone who’s done a number of tech interviews,
            I can’t imagine how I’d manage if I couldn’t filter
            applicants on whether or not they could actually do the job.
            I’d end up with some kind of weird cargo-culty thing, a
            combination of pointless credentialism and horribly
            discriminatory soft-skills stuff.

            I meant it when I called it “a closed-loop Human Centipede
            of lies and fakery
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/05/15/open-thread-49-5/#comment-358622>“.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465753>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 5:04 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465885>
                ~new~

                    I’d end up with some kind of weird cargo-culty
                    thing, a combination of pointless credentialism and
                    horribly discriminatory soft-skills stuff.

                What’s really terrifying is when you talk about hiring
                practices with almost anyone who works in a non-STEM
                field (or art, since you can review portfolios), you
                realize that /this is exactly how they select people/.
                It’s one reason why the bias towards hiring former
                coworkers is so high in professions like sales and PR:
                it’s one of the very few ways you have of selecting
                someone based on known performance characteristics.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465881>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 11:40 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466225>
                    ~new~

                    I used to hire accounts payable clerks decades ago.
                    I am a bit confused by the way you hire people. No
                    one I hired had done exactly the sort of thing we
                    were doing in my company, so I couldn’t tell
                    directly how they’d do. When I interviewed for new
                    jobs, I would never look at a job that was
                    essentially the same thing I had been doing before;
                    what would be the point of moving? This is
                    especially true for professional jobs — aren’t most
                    people looking to improve themselves with a new job?

                    What worked best for me was I gave a math test to
                    all my interviewees. This broke out the sharp and
                    less so pretty well. I had interviewees saying that
                    they could do better if they were trained in it, but
                    what I was testing for was their intuitive skills
                    and not how they’d been trained. Luckily it was a
                    pretty small company and HR didn’t realize how we
                    could get killed by Griggs.

                    But I don’t understand how you can tell explicitly
                    if someone can do the job, unless they are just
                    doing what they’ve done in the past, which doesn’t
                    sound like a very difficult job. Even my clerks
                    needed to have more skills than that.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465885>
                  #
                    Jiro says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 12:19 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466229>
                    ~new~

                        When I interviewed for new jobs, I would never
                        look at a job that was essentially the same
                        thing I had been doing before; what would be the
                        point of moving? This is especially true for
                        professional jobs — aren’t most people looking
                        to improve themselves with a new job?

                    Assuming you mean “that the interviewee had been
                    doing before”, there are plenty of reasons to move,
                    including better salary and mismanagement at the old
                    company.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465885>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 12:37 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466238>
                    ~new~

                        What worked best for me was I gave a math test
                        to all my interviewees. This broke out the sharp
                        and less so pretty well. I had interviewees
                        saying that they could do better if they were
                        trained in it, but what I was testing for was
                        their intuitive skills and not how they’d been
                        trained. Luckily it was a pretty small company
                        and HR didn’t realize how we could get killed by
                        Griggs.

                    My understanding of Griggs might be off, but I think
                    if there was any math associated with the job then
                    you would be in the clear.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465885>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:38 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466403>
                    ~new~

                        My understanding of Griggs might be off, but I
                        think if there was any math associated with the
                        job then you would be in the clear.

                    I don’t think this is true. In Griggs, the
                    implication was that the test had to be specifically
                    what the job entailed, and so I think a generalized
                    math test would not work. Although my test was
                    specific math they would be doing on the job, so
                    maybe it would have been good.

                    In any case, I did get slammed by HR about a test
                    about 15 years ago, at the same firm, but after it
                    had grown a bunch. In this case I was hiring an
                    accountant, and I wanted to be sure this accountant
                    was used to dealing with large Excel spreadsheets.
                    So I made up a test that had about 50,000 lines,
                    where I asked the interviewee to do some various
                    math calculations that involved sorting, filtering,
                    totaling, etc. (not exactly what they would be
                    doing, but requiring the same skills). HR told me
                    “no,” my test wasn’t “validated.” I think the HR
                    person was pretty confused, but they had the
                    principle right that tests are dangerous when it
                    comes to litigation.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-465885>
111.
    jonm says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:13 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465598>
    ~new~

    More mysterious than the question of why hospitals and universities
    don’t offer the old standard of service at the same price, is why
    they don’t try to offer a better standard of service at the new price.

    If a hospital could actually cut costs by creating shared wards etc,
    why doesn’t someone create a hospital with these various cost cuts
    and use the surplus to poach the most highly regarded doctors at a
    salary premium. This would then get round the status issues (you’re
    visiting the most well regarded doctors) and presumably get the
    doctors on side once they see their new paychecks. If those doctors
    really are better, you can plaster advertising around the city
    highlighting your improved survival rates etc.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        johnmcg says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 3:27 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465607>
        ~new~

        Fancy restaurants “waste” a lot of money on having fancy china,
        tableware, dining decorations, and service.

        In theory, a restaurant could cut costs by adopting the service
        standards of fast food restaurants and use the surplus to poach
        the most highly regarded chefs at a salary premium.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465598>
          o
            grendelkhan says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:46 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466008>
            ~new~

            Fancy restaurants aren’t the only place you can get food.
            The medical sector /is/ the only place you can get medical
            care. (Well, apart from DIY gray-market stuff.) If there
            existed a medical or educational or infrastructural
            equivalent of grocery stores or bodegas or fast food, we
            wouldn’t be in this mess.

            I wonder what the equivalent of those things would be.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465607>
              +
                Matt M says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 5:41 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466022>
                ~new~

                I regularly call for the existence of a “wal-mart for
                medical care” which usually causes people to recoil in
                horror even though it would probably save people
                millions of dollars….

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466008>
                  #
                    Incurian says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 10:18 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466114>
                    ~new~

                    No one would get their healthcare there, just like
                    no one shops at Wal-Mart.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466022>
                  #
                    Controls Freak says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:50 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466335>
                    ~new~

                    …I really hope this has an implied /s tag.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466022>
              +
                DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 3:15 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466287>
                ~new~

                    I wonder what the equivalent of those things would be.

                I think they are called urgent care facilities. Small,
                maybe one or a few doctors.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466008>
                  #
                    IrishDude says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:37 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466302>
                    ~new~

                    Yep, and they’re very convenient compared to waiting
                    for an appointment for your primary care doctor or
                    going to the ER.

                    I haven’t tried it yet, but my health insurance also
                    has a webcam option to see one of a set of on-demand
                    doctors through a skype-like interface. I think they
                    can prescribe you drugs if needed, all while in the
                    comfort of your home. I’ve got to try it out at some
                    point so I can see if it’s effective and worth the cost.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466287>
                  #
                    Matt M says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 5:03 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466338>
                    ~new~

                    Regulations vary from state to state. Last time I
                    checked (over a year ago) most states they could
                    prescribe, but a few large ones were still not
                    allowing it.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466287>
112.
    wintermute92 says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:17 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465601>
    ~new~

    On schools: we should admit that the /domain/ of schools seems to
    have expanded massively. Since the 1950s my school added an
    orchestra, an art program (with kilns and other expensive gear), a
    newly-renovated football field, computer labs and programming
    courses, police officers and security cameras, and endless
    extra-curriculars to get students into college. None of that appears
    on a math test. This may be stupid spending (criminalizing teenage
    fistfights almost certainly makes the world a worse place), but it’s
    not cost inflation; it’s just scope creep. I wish someone would
    calculate how much of the price hike comes from those things.

    (Incidentally, that $3000 private school you mention seemed to count
    on massive amounts of volunteer labor from well-educated parents.
    Not exactly a fair comparison.)

    But I’ll grant the larger point: lots of money is vanishing for no
    good reason.

    There was a challenge buried in your conclusion: would the
    no-free-college crowd accept handouts at the quality per dollar we
    used to have? I’ll vote yes. If we could get an 80% reduction in
    college costs and keep it that way, I’d happily bury all my
    libertarian principles and theories and go “we spend taxes on lots
    of stupid stuff, this at least has a great payout”.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Deiseach says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 4:09 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465641>
        ~new~

        /computer labs and programming courses/

        This. With all the government push towards “we must churn out
        high quality high skills employees for the information
        economy!”, such classes will be started earlier and earlier and
        the equipment etc. (including paying software licences and
        paying subscriptions for the online courses) are going to be
        pricey. A basic 1970s/80s education that would have got you a
        relatively decent job isn’t even at the races nowadays.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465601>
113.
    Alex Zavoluk says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:18 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465602>
    ~new~

    Wikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tort_reform#Loser_pays>
    suggests that almost all of those other countries have litigation
    rules that make weak civil cases more costly, which seems like
    evidence in favor of the litigation hypothesis. It also means that
    there’s a relatively straightforward solution.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
114.
    sovietKaleEatYou says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 3:37 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465619>
    ~new~

    I would argue that instead of looking at “where is the money going”,
    you look at “where does the money come from”. I think if you take a
    random nonprofit and give them a billion dollars, they’ll spend it,
    and most likely they won’t use it on something nefarious. To answer
    the question of why the extra money is going to random potentially
    frivolous overhead costs of (health care/ academia/ transportation)
    I think the harder question is not “what are these overhead costs”
    but “where is this money coming from” and “why is the money not
    going to (doctors/ researchers/ commuters)”.

    Let me give an example. Academic here. Over the last decade I’ve
    been in multiple universities. Each one has had renovations in my
    building or a building near me. All the renovations cited “safety”
    with the buildings being from some random sample from the 70s, 60s,
    50s, 40s. I find it hard to believe that all these safety issues are
    suddenly cropping up *now*. You could say that the renovations are a
    consequence of paranoia over lawsuits involving asbestos/ structural
    integrity/ etc. You could say (as Atul Gawande argues
    <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/01/23/the-heroism-of-incremental-care>)
    that we’re prioritizing “disruptive” solutions to incremental ones.
    All of this would be accurate. But if it weren’t construction, extra
    funds would go to something else. It’s not hard to waste money.

    Now the real question is, where is the extra money coming from and
    why is this extra money not going to researchers. In academia, the
    extra money is coming from increasing costs of education, which are
    a consequence of (social signalling/ rigid rankings-based consumer
    preference/ globalization/ … you name it).

    Why isn’t the money going to researchers? I would guess that this is
    a simple case of supply and demand. Academia is an exclusive field.
    There is a limited supply of PhD’s. People who stick around after
    their doctorate are either incredibly good or incredibly dedicated
    to doing something “meaningful”. Because there is a “higher purpose”
    component to academics, these people are often unwilling to do
    anything else. This means that we have an extremely inelastic supply
    of labor (it’s probably similar for medicine). Therefore, so long as
    universities provide a livable income and adjunct professors don’t
    literally have to moonlight at McDonald’s to supplement their
    income, they will stay in academia no matter what.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 7:04 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465756>
        ~new~

        You see this kind of imbalance in any industry where the supply
        of labor radically exceeds the demand. I’m working in video
        games at the moment, and the industry has a well-deserved
        reputation for working people very long and hard hours (12
        straight months of 70+ hour work weeks for salaried exempt
        employees are not unheard of) for pay well below tech industry
        average. But there is no shortage of young idealistic
        20-somethings fresh out of college who love playing games and
        think that making a career in the field is all they’ve ever
        wanted. So much like with grad students and adjunct faculty, the
        labor conditions don’t really improve because the institution
        has no need to keep you around; there are a thousand people
        waiting in the wings to take your spot if you leave.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465619>
          o
            FacelessCraven says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 9:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466090>
            ~new~

            @Cypren – Before I got into the industry, I spent some time
            taking classes at a community college, and ended up getting
            a job as a TA for the Game Design Program. The entire
            experience was enormously depressing. Dozens of students in
            a modelling class showing the three or four cubic primitives
            they’d crashed together for their 2-month-long project. two
            people in the whole program knew how to UV; no one knew how
            to make a normal map. Art assignments involved drawing stuff
            with crayolas. People dreaming of QA jobs as a way to “work
            their way up from the ground floor”. The worst part was
            dealing with my boss, the head of the program, an honest,
            highly decent human being who nonetheless saw all this as
            offering students opportunity to grow and learn, and was
            constantly talking about how Game Design was the hot new
            thing for academia and had all these amazing opportunities…
            The students were terminally underachieving, and the profs
            were coddling them to a point that seemed immoral.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465756>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 9:36 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466100>
                ~new~

                The good news is that at least at the three game studios
                I’ve worked at, our staff were all pretty highly
                qualified from top to bottom; I think most of the people
                you’re talking about get weeded out before they ever
                make it into the industry proper. The bad news is that
                we also had lot of very skilled, highly qualified people
                who made the mistake of trying to enter as QA and
                quickly learned that the difference between QA and Dev
                is the difference between enlisted and officers in the
                military: no fraternization, minimal chance for
                promotion from the lower class to the higher.

                Anyone who tells you to go QA to “get your foot in the
                door” is sadly unfamiliar with the realities of life in
                the industry. That might work at a very small studio,
                but it definitely does not work anywhere that’s doing
                AAA games unless you are an extremely shrewd political
                operator.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466090>
                  #
                    FacelessCraven says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 5:11 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466340>
                    ~new~

                    @Cypren – Sure, none of the places I’ve worked would
                    hire them either… But the kids didn’t know that.
                    Their complete lack of skill was blindingly obvious,
                    but no one in a position of authority was giving
                    anything but asspats and attaboys. It got to the
                    point that whenever I met a new student, I’d show
                    them the “always be closing”
                    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q4PE2hSqVnk>
                    speech, just to try and restore some sense of
                    perspective. Letting students enroll in a college
                    program advertised as preparing them for a job but
                    that doesn’t actually prepare them for a job seems
                    criminal. Communicating to them that QA was not a
                    realistic path forward was just another crucial fact
                    that didn’t get taught.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466100>
115.
    jkl says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:09 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465640>
    ~new~

    The price of concert tickets
    <https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2013/06/12/rock-and-roll-economics-and-rebuilding-middle-class>
    has also risen much faster than general consumer prices. Note that
    is a partisan source and makes partisan arguments, but there is no
    real reason to believe the graph specifically about concert tickets
    is wrong or misleading. I don’t think there is any real doubt that
    concert tickets have in fact gotten more expensive relative to
    anything else.

    I’m assuming concerts haven’t actually gotten better. It seems
    fairly clear there aren’t any burdensome regulations or licensing
    requirements involved. Nor is anybody forced to attend concerts. It
    seems like a standard sort of market, like other consumer markets.

    Krueger says that sales of recorded music have declined, so
    performers have raised ticket prices to compensate for lost revenue.
    According to that argument, actually tickets were underpriced
    before, and performers were willingly accepting less than they
    could, because they were comfortable with the lifestyle supported by
    sales of recorded music. That argument seems strange to me. At the
    very least, it requires some more evidence. Krueger quotes David
    Bowie, but that performer talks about touring more, not raising prices.

    My own layman’s opinion is that society has simply changed its mind
    about what concerts are worth. Concerts themselves have not changed,
    but they have become more valuable to us. It has become more
    important for us to attend them. Performers have noticed this and
    have raised prices accordingly.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        jkl says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 6:20 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465723>
        ~new~

        I think I failed to understand how strange the concert ticket
        market is. As Krueger notes, tickets have in fact been
        underpriced, and the existence of scalpers is proof of that.
        There was this sort of tacit agreement that performers would try
        not to “charge too much” in exchange for the loyalty of their fans.

        But when performers started noticing that their audience, when
        given the chance, would listen to their music for free over the
        internet instead of going to Tower Records and buying it, maybe
        the performers felt a bit like the old tacit agreement was
        broken and decided to raise prices on tickets, absorbing the
        margins previously taken by scalpers.

        This interpretation hinges on whether the ticket price data
        shows the original sale price for tickets, not the final price
        paid by attendees. I do not know if that is the case or not. It
        also implies that scalping has become much less profitable. I’m
        not sure about that, but it doesn’t seem right given that there
        are new entrants into the market such as StubHub.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465640>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 6:50 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466044>
            ~new~

            Only commenting to say, the existence of scalpers does not
            prove tickets are underpriced. The venue sets one price for
            everybody (or one price per section or what-not), but the
            scalpers need only sell a sub-set of the tickets to the
            sub-set most willing to pay (with a particular time crunch
            to boot). It sounds like jkl is correct that if it’s mostly
            just what Bowie said we need more evidence. The frequency of
            sold-out concerts for certain performers better argues that
            tickets are underpriced, though they may well be priced
            within an appropriate range of uncertainty.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465723>
      *
        Synonym Seven says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 2:14 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465967>
        ~new~

            It seems fairly clear there aren’t any burdensome
            regulations or licensing requirements involved.

        You know what they say about things that seem fairly clear…

        For a venue, you have all the standard commercial space
        regulations/licensing (fire code, workers comp), on top of food
        service regulations/licensing, on /top/ of your liquor license,
        and all of that intermingled with ever-increasing rent
        (especially since you’re in a downtown area) and the costs of
        maintaining your sound system (and don’t forget getting it
        repaired every time some drunk idiot spills a drink on your
        mixing console or the Butthole Surfers decide it’d be funny to
        set your monitors on fire).

        The rest isn’t as starkly about regulations or licensing, more
        just general economics. On the tippy-toppy-high-end – the
        stadium shows for top-40 lip synchers and boomer revival acts –
        you have a lot of extra employee costs to factor in, so if a
        promoter can’t pay you at least $X, you’re better off keeping
        the doors shut. For the club circuit, sometimes the atmosphere
        of live music isn’t exactly conductive towards maintaining one’s
        liquor license, and with increased gentrification in the cities,
        you can start getting by on canned music and overcharging for
        gluten-free yuppie chow. Or you could hire a DJ to play canned
        music with cross-fades and a drum-loop and not have to worry
        about providing a large stage and versatile sound system.

        Meanwhile, for the band, the cost of travel has increased, and
        with digital distribution there isn’t as deep a pool of “people
        who are into your stuff enough to go to a concert, but who are
        unable to buy your albums”, so you can’t count on merch sales as
        much as you could back in the 80s and 90s. Not to mention that a
        lot of venues have either shut their doors or gone DJ-only, so
        there’s far less opportunities to be a house band, and more
        pressure to make each show financially worth your while – it’s a
        lot, lot harder to get by on the margins (“we’ll play twenty
        shows and make twenty bucks each night” versus “we’ll play two
        shows and make two hundred bucks each night”).

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465640>
116.
    nacht says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:31 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465658>
    ~new~

    Not sure this came up, but one thing that has dectupled or so is
    complexity. In the 70’s, there was not this massive customization of
    education- kids were smart or dumb. I suspect it’s the same for
    medicine- the number of options is massively higher. And colleges
    have increased the options to students (which you point out) and the
    administrators to manage them. The infrastructure to manage all this
    is a lot more expensive, after accounting for things like falsely
    high prices to account for transfer payments to those who can’t
    afford it.

    Look at something that has not gotten more complex, as the null set.
    Air travel. It still costs about what it did in the past and has
    been coming down since 1995
    <https://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/airfares/programs/economics_and_finance/air_travel_price_index/html/AnnualFares.html>.
    The product (747, 737) has gotten more efficient and safer, but the
    design is basically the same. The ATC rules would be same story.
    Employees of the airline are probably not as happy as they once
    were, but hey, your kids aren’t dumb anymore !

    Same for Automobiles
    <http://cta.ornl.gov/data/tedb34/Spreadsheets/Table10_10.xls>. Like
    Nurses, they are the same inflation adjusted cost. Just the system
    is more complex so everything around them costs more. It probably
    costs a lot more now to own a car than it used to, but the car
    itself is the same.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
117.
    Neike Taika-Tessaro <http://wildcard.thorngale.net> says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 4:43 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465667>
    ~new~

    Total shot in the dark, rampant speculation, with nothing tangible
    to show for it, but nonetheless a thought I had:

    /“Doctors used to make house calls; even when I was young in the
    ’80s my father would still go to the houses of difficult patients
    who were too sick to come to his office.”/

    Is this maybe a hint as to the core of the issue for at least some
    of the examples? Are we maybe just smacking bang into inefficiencies
    of scale? Like, to pick a stupid example by way of analogy,
    algorithmically the travelling salesman problem doesn’t intuitively
    /look/ like a big problem until you’ve got more than a handful of
    nodes, at which point you need to solve it with heuristics. Are we
    still trying to solve problems we should be tossing heuristics at
    with algorithms? Are there maybe even no heuristics we can employ
    the problems? Could we be witnessing some kind of networking
    overheads we’re really bad at seeing?

    I guess this might be easy enough to explore in principle, though!
    How does this correlate with population sizes (after adjusting for
    potential supply and demand changes that might come with that)?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
118.
    craftman says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:00 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465679>
    ~new~

    ““LOOK, REALLY OUR MAIN PROBLEM IS THAT ALL THE MOST IMPORTANT
    THINGS COST TEN TIMES AS MUCH AS THEY USED TO FOR NO REASON, PLUS
    THEY SEEM TO BE GOING DOWN IN QUALITY, AND NOBODY KNOWS WHY…”

    This may be a little facile, like blaming it on increased
    adminstrator positions at school, but…how dynamic are firms in
    education, health care, hell even infrastructure?

    All of the companies I have been involved in go through some natural
    feast/famine cycles, and they generally take on a lot of expensive
    managers, consultants, etc. during the cash-rich times. Those people
    are the first to go during a downturn (even minor downturns, not
    stricly recessions or mass layoffs). Maybe it seems like this would
    be obvious enough to figure out. Sum up the cost of inputs and see
    which is changing as a % over time. My guess is labor.

    I also have problems with using CPI to measure quality of
    good/services, but I’m not sure how to articulate that yet and I
    have some reading to do.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
119.
    ChuckleberryFinn says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:04 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465684>
    ~new~

    Look at textbook prices. Look at drug prices. Look at how big
    hospitals and academic institutions operate. I know this isn’t
    really the point of this blog (and I really enjoy/appreciate trying
    to mechanistically break down these sorts of big problems) but I
    think we need to take seriously how much market ideology has
    infiltrated education and healthcare. I expect that these costs will
    continue to climb because as long as wealth continues to be
    generated and the economy continues to grow (no matter how
    lopsidedly), the relative value of things that are NEEDED will
    continue right along with the big ol’ pot of money. We will continue
    to pay as much as the market dictates we should pay because we NEED
    these things; our hands are tied. It’s pretty telling that “cost
    disease” happens when consumers have a significant structural
    disadvantage (generally speaking, most people want to live) in price
    negotiation and not for things like Xboxs and blenders. Hence why
    libertarianism isn’t compatible with a compassionate society.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Mark V Anderson says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 12:33 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466233>
        ~new~

        I’m not the first to say this, but you need to factor in
        clothing and food into your theory. Costs for both of those have
        come down in price dramatically, but we need them too.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465684>
          o
            ChuckleberryFinn says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 2:18 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466257>
            ~new~

            The cost of food has come down “dramatically”? I would like
            to see that data, because I’m pretty sure that’s completely
            untrue. Not to mention, the farming industry receives how
            many billions in subsidies every year? The government knows
            how important it is to keep food prices artificially low
            because the market would price people out of their food and
            things would get very bad very quickly.

            It’s hard to argue that food costs have increased relative
            to inflation, but how do you separate monetary inflation
            from the cost of food? Don’t you think that something so
            fundamental to society has had an effect on monetary
            inflation? Inflation doesn’t just happen, it is effected by
            real world phenomena, and I would say that you can be pretty
            certain food plays a role in that. CPI is how inflation is
            measured, and CPI is directly tied to the cost of food.

            In fact, if you take the price of bread in 1913 from this
            chart:
            http://inflationdata.com/articles/2013/03/21/food-price-inflation-1913/

            and plug it into this inflation calculator:
            http://www.usinflationcalculator.com/

            You will see that the predicted price of bread in 2013
            ($1.41) is almost the exact same as the actual price of
            bread in 2013 ($1.422). You could attribute that to
            coincidence or just a reflection of prices not changing, but
            I would argue that it reflects how much the cost of bread
            has inflated, given the tight link between food staples and CPI.

            Also, eggs shouldn’t be so cheap, wtf.

            How CPI is calculated:
            http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/inflat.htm

            The costs of making clothing have vastly diminished because
            we can now just pay little Bangledeshi children cents on the
            dollar instead of anything approaching a living wage for an
            American. Clothing production costs have greatly diminished
            (both quality and wages) and consumerism has completely
            changed how we buy clothes over the past 50 years. People
            buy wayyyy more clothing than they used to
            (https://smartasset.com/credit-cards/the-economics-of-fast-fashion).
            Costs haven’t needed to increase to allow for massive growth.

            This isn’t a foolproof theory, but I would guess that there
            is something to the fact that housing, healthcare and
            education costs continue to increase while most other things
            don’t, and that has to do more with fundamental flaws in
            markets than it does with “regulation”. If wages continue to
            stagnate but the market continues to grow, we could have a
            real crisis.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466233>
              +
                shakeddown <https://shakeddown.wordpress.com/> says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 2:24 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466259>
                ~new~

                    . Not to mention, the farming industry receives how
                    many billions in subsidies every year? The
                    government knows how important it is to keep food
                    prices artificially low because the market would
                    price people out of their food and things would get
                    very bad very quickly.

                My impression was that this was to keep american farmers
                competitive with imported food, which has similar prices
                despite not being subsidizes.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466257>
                  #
                    ChuckleberryFinn says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:04 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466279>
                    ~new~

                    I mean, we can still both be right here. Food
                    subsidies for low income families are another hugely
                    important piece of this. My point is just that food
                    prices do continue to increase along with the market
                    size increasing and that the government goes to
                    great lengths to make sure that people get fed.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466259>
              +
                baconbacon says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 2:28 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466263>
                ~new~

                    Not to mention, the farming industry receives how
                    many billions in subsidies every year?

                If farming subsidies are 20 billion a year, and all of
                it went to food production (ie no ethanol subsidies that
                increase the cost of food), that would be ~ $60 per
                person per year in food cost increases to cover, or $240
                a year for a family of 4.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466257>
                  #
                    ChuckleberryFinn says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:14 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466283>
                    ~new~

                    This feels /just/ a bit oversimplified, but maybe
                    I’m wrong. Also don’t forget about the 107 billion
                    in low income food subsidies!

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466263>
              +
                The Nybbler says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 2:35 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466267>
                ~new~

                The US government intervenes in the food market to keep
                prices high, not low.

                Your own chart shows that food prices have largely
                decreased. If bread has risen at about the inflation
                rate, then meat has as well, cheese slightly more,
                potatoes much more… and everything else much less. Milk,
                butter, rice, pork, eggs, sugar, even coffee.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466257>
                  #
                    ChuckleberryFinn says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:58 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466277>
                    ~new~

                    It doesn’t show that food prices have largely
                    decreased. Relative to inflation, some have
                    decreased. But prices have gone up for literally
                    everything on that list. My whole point is that to
                    separate food prices from CPI and inflation is
                    impossible because the two are so tightly intertwined.

                    But my original point which I feel like you guys are
                    getting away from, is that with things like
                    healthcare and education and housing, consumers have
                    much less power to negotiate costs with the market.
                    No one wants to drive down production costs of
                    education (we still want to maximize efficiency, of
                    course, but can’t do the sort of cost slashing like
                    clothing companies do) and healthcare, so in order
                    to keep growing (which market ideology demands)
                    costs need to increase.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466267>
              +
                Jack says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 2:45 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466271>
                ~new~

                You are making me wonder about the extent to which the
                problem areas SCC identifies have in common a relatively
                high proportion of the people in those areas living in
                developed countries vs the USA. Food and clothes are
                cheap because many of the people dependent on those
                industries live in developing countries, whereas housing
                is mostly locally owned, and education and health are
                mostly services provided directly by local employees?
                This would suggest, perhaps, that wherever we have been
                able to undercut costs by relying on people in
                developing countries, they look like they grow at
                inflation or below inflation, and wherever we have not,
                over inflation.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466257>
                  #
                    ChuckleberryFinn says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:20 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466290>
                    ~new~

                    That’s interesting.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466271>
              +
                DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 3:20 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466292>
                ~new~

                    Not to mention, the farming industry receives how
                    many billions in subsidies every year? The
                    government knows how important it is to keep food
                    prices artificially low because the market would
                    price people out of their food and things would get
                    very bad very quickly.

                The main purpose of federal farm programs, starting in
                the New Deal, has been to push farm prices, hence food
                prices, up, not down. Similarly with European practices.

                The pattern you describe may well exist in the third
                world, but in the developed world it’s the exact opposite.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466257>
                  #
                    ChuckleberryFinn says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:47 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466310>
                    ~new~

                    Many many more billions are spent by the government
                    on making food affordable for consumers, but you’re
                    right that farm subsidies aren’t a good example of
                    my point.

                    I am saying that food prices have gone up and that
                    they directly affect how we measure inflation. So if
                    you accept inflation you also have to accept that
                    there has been a concurrent increase in food prices.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466292>
                  #
                    Mark V Anderson says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:56 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466405>
                    ~new~

                        I am saying that food prices have gone up and
                        that they directly affect how we measure
                        inflation. So if you accept inflation you also
                        have to accept that there has been a concurrent
                        increase in food prices.


                    See this site.
                    <https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2012/04/how-america-spends-money-100-years-in-the-life-of-the-family-budget/255475/>
                    Scroll down a page to see the graph. It shows that
                    the food portion of American’s budgets have
                    decreased from about 42% in 1900 to about 13% in
                    2003. The graph also shows clothing down
                    dramatically, but housing up. So there is no
                    relation between need for a product and its tendency
                    to go up or down. But the way housing is different
                    from food and clothing is that there are fewer
                    regulations on food and clothing sales than on
                    housing. Also that food and clothing is easier to
                    mass produce and ship around the world, which makes
                    such products much more immune to the cost disease
                    Scott refers to.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466292>
              +
                talldave2 says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 12:14 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466722>
                ~new~

                Food as a share of household budgets has fallen
                dramatically. See Table 7—Food expenditures by families
                and individuals as a share of disposable personal income.

                https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-expenditures.aspx

                And keep in mind those Bangladeshi children would be
                starving without that work due to the general
                mismanagement of their country.

                /there is something to the fact that housing, healthcare
                and education costs continue to increase while most
                other things don’t, and that has to do more with
                fundamental flaws in markets than it does with
                “regulation”./

                It’s not a coincidence those are the least
                market-oriented, most-regulated industries (e.g. the
                degree to which gov’ts in California have refused to
                entertain proposals to build more housing seems to be
                driving costs there more than anything else). The
                difference is particularly obvious in energy costs,
                where “investments” in green energy have resulted in
                higher costs and blackouts for energy consumers in those
                states and countries. Naturally, there’s a strong lobby
                that insists none of these problems are caused by green
                energy, since they can’t survive without massive
                subsidies, but they’re not very persuasive given the
                correlations.
                https://wattsupwiththat.com/2017/02/09/south-australia-heatwave-wind-power-collapse-rolling-blackouts/

                “Q: How did socialists light their homes before candles?
                A: With electricity.”

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466257>
120.
    Bram Cohen says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:11 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465686>
    ~new~

    There’s nothing extreme about suggesting market failure. There are
    some necessary conditions for markets to work right, and they’re
    notably lacking in some markets, particularly health care. This is a
    major field of study in economics:
    http://www.scielosp.org/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0042-96862004000200012

    People do have the option to go to a college which is about the same
    as the ones decades ago. It’s called community college. You can even
    do it instead of high school. People don’t do that mostly because
    they wrongfully believe that such an education is of vastly lower
    value than the social-clubs-and-Milo one.

    Social pressure is definitely the cause of rising costs of child
    care. As in, it used to be it was fine to leave children alone at
    home. Now such behavior is nearly grounds for getting your children
    taken away. As a result people spend a lot of money on childcare
    which they simply don’t need.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 7:10 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465759>
        ~new~

            People don’t do that mostly because they wrongfully believe
            that such an education is of vastly lower value than the
            social-clubs-and-Milo one.

        But it seems to be a correct belief if you assume that the
        inherent value of a college degree is not the education, but the
        signaling value compared to your competitors for employment.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465686>
          o
            Bram Cohen says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 6:46 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466041>
            ~new~

            The value of that signaling appears to be high if you don’t
            adjust for the confounder that the sorts of people who get
            admitted to prestigious schools are already likely to do
            better later in life anyway. When that’s adjusted for the
            signaling value appears to be very small or nonexistent.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465759>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:26 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466073>
                ~new~

                That makes sense for industries like tech which don’t
                have cartels regulating entry. But what about fields
                like law, where the top echelons are only really
                recruited from Big Law attorneys, who are in turn only
                recruited from top-tier schools? It seems like the
                signaling value there is essentially a hard barrier to
                entry.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466041>
                  #
                    Bram Cohen says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 11:42 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466127>
                    ~new~

                    In an extremely unfavorable job market like law is
                    currently signaling becomes very important because
                    there are so many applicants for every position that
                    employers requires the signals on top of everything
                    else just to keep the number of candidates they have
                    to evaluate under control. But getting a law degree
                    today is looking like bad value for your money even
                    under the best of circumstances.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466073>
      *
        sharper13 says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 3:17 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465989>
        ~new~

        Is the fact that these areas are lacking features essential for
        a market to function properly a market failure, or a government
        failure? I’m pretty sure it isn’t the market setting the rules
        for education, or health care which result in third-party
        payers, for example. There is a significant difference between
        Phoenix/Houston and NY/SF in regulations and in housing cost
        changes over time. One pair has a much more functional market
        than the other, is that due to market failure?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465686>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 7:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466051>
            ~new~

            Some of the lacking features have little to do with the
            government, as you may read in the citation Bram Cohen
            provided. Could you provide or cite meanings for government
            vs market failure that make them exclusive categories?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465989>
          o
            Bram Cohen says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 7:30 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466053>
            ~new~

            In the case of education it’s probably mostly a market
            failure, caused by the pathetic quality of information
            people get about the value of various forms of education.
            For health care it’s mostly market failure, although there
            are definitely places where government regulations are
            making it worse, particularly around the production and sale
            of generic drugs. Housing is arguably mostly the
            government’s doing, because the main problem is zoning and
            similar regulations getting in the way of more building.
            That’s a big part of the difference between phoenix/houston
            and ny/sf, although the other one isn’t really a market
            failure at all: There’s more space around phoenix and
            houston, so the supply of housing is naturally much larger,
            and people are so much more productive in big cities than
            outside of them that they’re willing to pay a ludicrous
            premium to live there commensurate with the ridiculous
            increase in pay they get.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465989>
              +
                IrishDude says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 12:31 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466133>
                ~new~

                    In the case of education it’s probably mostly a
                    market failure, caused by the pathetic quality of
                    information people get about the value of various
                    forms of education.

                How do you define market failure? If you’re right that
                it’s hard to get info about the value of different
                educations, that seem like it would affect government
                bureaucrats and parents alike, as far as deciding what
                is the optimal education path.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466053>
          o
            Corey says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 8:25 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466072>
            ~new~

            It’s slowly getting better in healthcare, e.g. Maryland has
            all-payer rate setting for hospital rates, and it’s working
            pretty well (O’Malleycare?)

            Healthcare’s always going to have *some* trouble with market
            failures because we’re not going to give up the quality
            floor that high barriers to entry and regulations provide,
            nor are we going to make it completely excludable.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465989>
              +
                Bram Cohen says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 11:44 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466128>
                ~new~

                The main problem in health care is one of information.
                People go to the doctor to get their opinion about what
                procedures they need and trust them almost completely.
                This creates tremendous bad incentives for doctors and
                everyone who has influence over them to exploit patients.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466072>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 12:04 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466132>
                    ~new~

                    That’s equally true of lawyers, architects,
                    accountants, or almost any other highly skilled
                    profession. None of those markets is as badly fucked
                    up as healthcare.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466128>
                  #
                    AnonEEmous says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:09 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466155>
                    ~new~

                    I mean.

                    Lawyers are paid by the hour, but broadly speaking
                    you go employ a lawyer when you have a problem and
                    then the issue continues apace. In many cases, the
                    lawyer accepts a portion of the winnings. And if
                    they don’t, then the costs are usually quite high,
                    which is why they’re either borne by the state,
                    borne by corporations, or in the case of divorce
                    borne either by rich husbands or not at all. That
                    market isn’t exactly in great shape. But that’s at
                    least a conversation worth having.

                    With architecture, you ask for a specific style or
                    so forth. There’s only so much that can be added on,
                    right? It’s not like the architect can tell you that
                    you need an extra building or anything, at least not
                    without you telling them to shove off.

                    And accounting is pretty much just – here, balance
                    these books.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466128>
                  #
                    IrishDude says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:36 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466268>
                    ~new~

                    I think doctors need to earn trust if they want to
                    have more patients come to them. They can do that by
                    showing patients good results over time, either
                    personally or by reputation. Hospitals that want a
                    good reputation and want to limit liability have
                    strong incentives to hire competent doctors.

                    I’m curious what you mean by exploit patients, but
                    if you mean treat patients poorly, then I disagree
                    as there are strong incentives to treat them well.
                    Do you want to have a reputation as a doctor that is
                    rude, gives bad medical advice, and is highly likely
                    to harm you due to lack of skill, or a doctor that
                    treats people decently, explains themselves well,
                    gives relevant information about the problem and
                    proposed solution as well as associated risks, and
                    that has a record for making people better?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466128>
                  #
                    cassander says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:37 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466269>
                    ~new~

                    @AnonEEmous

                    I think you’re understating the importance of those
                    jobs. in all three cases, you have to trust a
                    stranger, an expert in an esoteric field, with
                    something of huge importance to your life. the
                    choice of the wrong lawyer/contractor/accountant can
                    mean enormous costs, the right one huge windfalls,
                    and you have no way to really evaluate how good a
                    job they’re doing except by the outcome. The same is
                    true of doctors.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466128>
          o
            DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:26 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466294>
            ~new~

                Is the fact that these areas are lacking features
                essential for a market to function properly a market
                failure, or a government failure?

            I have been arguing for years that “market failure” is a
            misleading label. It describes a pattern, situations where
            individual rationality does not produce group rationality,
            that exists in a wide variety of settings, of which markets
            are only one. Rational ignorance of voters, for example, is
            a market failure due to the public good problem, although
            it’s happening in the setting of politics not market
            transactions.

            Government failure, where it is due to the same causes, is a
            form of market failure. For more details read
            <http://www.daviddfriedman.com/Machinery_3d_Edition/Market%20Failure.htm>
            or listen
            <https://cdn.cato.org/archive-2016/cppa-09-23-16-03.mp3> to.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465989>
              +
                Jack says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 3:40 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466305>
                ~new~

                This is what I was hoping to get at through a more
                socratic method. I’m baffled that there seem to be
                fields where a naive separation of market and government
                and their respective failures persist.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466294>
121.
    Rusty says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:22 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465693>
    ~new~

    A common feature here seems to be something to do with incentives.
    Are our systems somehow putting in place incentives for the actors
    within them that has this effect? Or to put it another way are our
    institutions stupider than the people inside them. In my own place
    of work I frequently think ‘I know what we should do here’ but I
    have no authority to do it and persuading the people two layers
    above me is a waste of their time and all downside for me. So I do
    the stupid thing and sometimes we end up paying money we really
    didn’t need to. Is it that we have put in place tons of procedures
    to make things better but that ends up being a set of incentives to
    do something done rather than disobey the system even when its dumb.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
122.
    MauchWesley says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 5:26 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465696>
    ~new~

    Regarding tunnels, helpful post just now from Alon Levy in /The
    American Interest/:
    http://www.the-american-interest.com/2017/02/10/why-we-cant-have-nice-things-2/

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
123.
    Hitfoav says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:15 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465719>
    ~new~

    Is it possible that a lot of the cost increases are from ever more
    marginal added “comforts” and “features”, with pressure on
    institutions to “upgrade” facilities and services by people selling
    those things, just as this pressure exists for individual consumers?
    I think this is related to the risk aversion element, as that’s a
    psychological dynamic heavily leveraged by advertising/sales forces.
    “Protect your family”, “Don’t miss out”…
    We are an antifrugal society, perhaps in part a consequence of
    reaching certain levels of wealth (and not knowing what to do with
    it?). Our institutions no doubt reflect this. Scott’s university
    example of added features (Milo and riot) is along these lines.

    I think we are also increasingly relying on things to replace human
    virtue and capacity. The former is more scalable, at least it is
    perceived this way in our materially advanced but arguably morally
    underdeveloped cultures, but it can also be both more costly and
    less effective. What’s more effective and efficient, a community
    that values health and acts accordingly to preserve and maintain
    their health, or a health care system built to service a community
    where those values find little expression? The former is potentially
    basically free, or better than free in the sense of paying dividends
    beyond just healthcare savings (basic good exercise and diet can be
    incredibly cost efficient but require knowledge, motivation and
    discipline). The latter can be as expensive as you want it to be,
    with ever more dysfunctional humans propped up by ever more
    sophisticated technological and human interventions, all just to get
    back to “normal”. (Could motorized wheelchairs and scooters alone
    account for the increases?? /jk)

    In other words, the collective knowledge and moral strengths of a
    society can make it more efficient; neither of these is necessarily
    dependent on sophisticated material means, though they certainly can
    help, for dissemination of cultural capital, new means of
    communication.

    Anecdotal aside: Henry Rollins on JRE talks about how weightlifting
    changed his life, and it all starting with with coach who said
    “you’re a skinny little f*ggot, I’m going to teach you to lift
    weights”.Despite the harsh language, that love and attention no
    doubt increased Rollins ability to contribute to society. Non
    scalable interaction…

    So I don’t know if that’s a potential cause or only a potential
    corrective direction, but its seems like it’s got to be in there.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
124.
    Sniffnoy says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:40 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465741>
    ~new~

    A number of people have pointed out the possibility that, you know,
    companies aren’t actually that efficient, and lots of value is eaten
    up by irrationalities caused by internal politics and such. And I
    agree that this is an underappreciated problem (well, in certain
    contexts). But is there any reason to think that this should be
    /more/ of a problem now than in the past? If not, this wouldn’t
    appear to be an explanation of /increasing/ costs.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
125.
    Bremen65 says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 6:42 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465744>
    ~new~

    To offer a counter-point: It may not be that things have gotten
    [relatively] more expensive, but that certain things – specifically
    those used to calculate CPI – have gotten [relatively] much cheaper.

    It’s undeniable that food and manufactured goods have become
    immensely cheaper thanks to technology/globalization. If you use
    them as your metric for price changes, then in comparison other
    prices will seem overvalued. If you instead calculated CPI based on
    older technology (say using the price of organic farms or handmade
    toys), you’d see much less of an increase. So the story might not be
    that health/schools/etc cost more, but that they cost about the same
    and that food and consumer goods cost much, much less.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        pipsterate says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 5:10 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466016>
        ~new~

        I brought this point up at Marginal Revolution (Tyler Cowen’s
        blog) and here are some of the responses I got:

            I’m no expert on CPI, but is it undeniable that food and mfg
            goods have become immensely cheaper?

            Here’s what I could find on food
            https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CPIFABSL

            I don’t know the data well enough to draw any conclusions,
            but it’s not obvious to me. I don’t know how to evaluate mfg
            goods, but it’s not clear to me that things like cars and
            washing machines are cheaper.

        —————–

            Agricultural raw material prices have risen much less than
            the CPI.

            But food at home and eating out prices have risen about the
            same as the all items CPI no matter how far back you go.

            Our food purchases are much more processed foods and less
            plain raw materials than it was a generation or two ago.
            Moreover, the variety has massively improved.For example, we
            can now buy fresh vegetables — imported from Latin America–
            all year long.. This does not show up in the CPI or most
            measures of consumer well being.

        —————–

            That’s a plausible hypothesis, but viewed through that frame
            of reference, median wages have also gone down tremendously.
            It’s still the case that the median person spends at least
            six times more of their paycheck on healthcare. If
            healthcare is a closer metric to “true prices” then
            manufactured good, then that means median wages have fallen
            by around 80%. It also means that overall GDP has crashed
            since 1970, since the price deflator now averages 6-7%, and
            nominal GDP has only averaged around 4%. It would mean that
            the economy has literally been in recession 90% of the past
            40 years.

            The only reason we’re not all starving in the street is from
            the miraculous gains in manufacturing productivity and
            automation. But again, in this framework, that process is
            largely exogenous to the terrible macroeconomic situation.
            If those gains slow down even a little, and the macro trends
            continue, we’re probably facing imminent economic collapse.
            So maybe this is a plausible hypothesis, but it certainly
            comes with a whole lot of extreme implications. I think
            medicine/education specific cost disease is a much more
            likely explanation.

        —————–

        I don’t know enough about this to have a firm opinion of my own.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465744>
          o
            moridinamael says:	
            February 13, 2017 at 11:26 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466700>
            ~new~

            It seems like the share of household income that Americans
            spend on groceries has halved
            <https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/chart-gallery/gallery/chart-detail/?chartId=76967>
            since 1960. We still spend about the same percentage as we
            used to on eating out. This makes a bit of intuitive sense,
            in that eating out is something that we can do more of or
            less of in response to how much of our budget it appears to
            be taking up.

            So I would generally interpret that as technology and
            globalization significantly driving down food costs, because
            food is one thing that is particularly susceptible to
            technology improvements improving efficiency and
            globalization making the underlying markets more efficient.

            Healthcare and college are both “services” oriented around
            fixed physical locations. Globalization can’t effect the
            prices of these services in the same way it does food, so
            relative to food prices we’re not going to see the
            globalization bonus to efficiency. And Scott has made a good
            case here and elsewhere that increasing medical technology
            has not resulted in all that much improvement in medical
            outcomes. Likewise, a college educated engineer graduating
            in 2017 is not any more capable than one who graduated in
            1960, modulo technology-specific skills. So as everything
            else becomes cheaper relative to healthcare and college,
            which don’t benefit from globalization or technological
            growth, the amount of our paycheck we end up spending on
            these relatively “fixed” services increases.

            Also, at the risk of clipping the edge of the Dunning-Kruger
            vortex, people have always wanted to send their kids to
            college, but now more people can afford to. Demand has
            increased much faster than supply, so prices have risen. You
            don’t see a lot of new universities being built, but you do
            see the enrollments at large universities growing, and huge
            spending on construction at those universities as they try
            to absorb more students, and hiring more and more
            bureaucrats. Still, demand is so much higher than supply
            that the schools can just charge more and more and people
            will pay. The “cost” of running the university balloons
            because it’s a company in a growth phase.

            The above paragraph is still true even before you take into
            account the predatory federal student loans, which allow
            people who /can’t/ afford to go to college to do so anyway,
            at prices that make no sense.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466016>
126.
    The Nybbler says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:15 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465764>
    ~new~

        So, to summarize: in the past fifty years, education costs have
        doubled, college costs have dectupled, health insurance costs
        have dectupled, subway costs have at least dectupled, and
        housing costs have increased by about fifty percent. US health
        care costs about four times as much as equivalent health care in
        other First World countries; US subways cost about eight times
        as much as equivalent subways in other First World countries.

    I think there are different reasons for these. Health insurance and
    college: We’ve increasingly decoupled who is paying and who is
    getting the service. IMO, everything else in these fields is
    secondary to that.

    Housing… may be not a “disease” at all. We have more people and the
    same amount of land. Regulations setting minimum square footages,
    maximum occupancies, numbers of bathrooms, eliminating rooming
    houses, etc, probably have something to do with it as well.

    Primary and secondary education: Probably the government really
    _has_ gotten better at wasting money. Also scope creep, security
    (some schools literally look like prisons nowadays, with high fences
    and security guards), special ed.

    Infrastructure: Lawsuits, environmental impact statements, and
    unions. It’s amazing we get anything built at any cost given how
    many people have an effective veto over any given project.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Nornagest says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 7:19 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465767>
        ~new~

            We have more people and the same amount of land.

        That would be a factor in e.g. Singapore, but in the United
        States there’s a huge amount of very cheap land out there. Most
        of the cheapest is in places where you’d be insane to try to
        build a city (though that sometimes doesn’t stop people; see
        e.g. Las Vegas), but if you go far enough out, it’s still
        possible to get twenty or forty acres of decent farmland (which
        is to say, buildable land with access to water and probably a
        climate that won’t make you want to kill yourself) for about the
        cost of an acre in the suburbs.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465764>
          o
            The Nybbler says:	
            February 10, 2017 at 9:00 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465795>
            ~new~

            Sure, but land that isn’t near a suitable place of
            employment doesn’t help, and we’re not decentralizing
            employment centers all that much (if at all)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465767>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 10, 2017 at 9:26 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465801>
                ~new~

                We are in fact going going in the reverse direction
                quite strongly: everything is centralizing
                <https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/rural-economy-population/employment-education/rural-employment-and-unemployment/>
                into the cities.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465795>
              +
                Nornagest says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 2:47 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465974>
                ~new~

                That’s a problem, but it’s a different problem than “too
                many people, not enough land”.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465795>
              +
                anondoty says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 9:06 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466594>
                ~new~

                Does anyone know why exactly employment opportunities
                are becoming increasingly concentrated in large cities?
                Is it because of some kind of synergistic networking
                effect whereby it’s easier for a company to find
                suitable employees in a city that already has other
                companies in the same industry located there, and
                therefore they will preferentially choose to locate
                themselves in these cities whenever possible?

                Do employment opportunities function the same way as
                social networks? (By this I mean, can a certain
                geographical location become good for employment
                opportunities solely because lots of other potential
                employees are already living there? Much as the value of
                using a certain social networking website shoots up
                rapidly if everyone else starts using it?)

                If this is true, then it would explain why cities that
                aren’t in “optimal” locations are nonetheless hotspots
                for employment: it’s because they already have lots of
                people living there, usually due to historical factors.
                And it also implies that any geographical location that
                doesn’t already have a large and/or growing population
                probably isn’t going to experience much job growth.

                Of course, I could be totally off base here, I know very
                little about the way businesses make these decisions and
                my understanding of economics is rudimentary at best.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-465795>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:04 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466809>
                    ~new~

                    Yes, this is exactly it. The economic term for it is
                    the agglomeration effect
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_agglomeration>.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466594>
      *
        Mark V Anderson says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 12:44 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466240>
        ~new~

        @ Nybbler – Nice short summary of the issues. I think best
        comment so far.

        In any economy in any country, there are going to be some costs
        that go up more than others. The increasing ones won’t be
        necessarily for the same reasons. But it does seem that
        increasing regulations, increasing litigation, and increasing
        expectations of services all play a part. The areas that have
        the biggest increases seem to be most affected by these three
        things.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465764>
      *
        baconbacon says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 1:32 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466244>
        ~new~

            Housing… may be not a “disease” at all. We have more people
            and the same amount of land.

        Population density in the US is less than 100 people per square
        mile, with 640 acres in a square mile that is 6.5 acres per
        person in this country. Even if 90% of land has other uses or is
        totally unsuitable for living you still end up with more than
        half an acre per person in the US.

        New York City has a density of 27,000 people per square mile, we
        aren’t even within an order of magnitude of population where
        “more people/same amount of land = higher prices” makes any sense.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465764>
          o
            baconbacon says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 1:35 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466245>
            ~new~

            If the entire state of New York had the population density
            of a small to medium city- like for example Cleveland, Ohio
            (~5k per sq mile) then you could almost fit the entire US
            population in that state.

            And that isn’t even one of the large states.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466244>
          o
            The Nybbler says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 1:43 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466248>
            ~new~

            See the conversation with Nornagest above. The problem isn’t
            a national “too many people, not enough land”. It’s that
            land isn’t fungible, so it’s “more people competing for the
            same land which is desirable for some reason”.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466244>
              +
                baconbacon says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 2:24 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466260>
                ~new~

                Land for building cities is pretty fungible, most big
                cities are not located on ideally suited geological
                formation that allow for skyscrapers to be built
                cheaply. King of Prussia (Pop density <2500 per sq mile)
                is a 10 min drive (with traffic 3 days) from
                Philadelphia (pop density ~11,500), it has a major
                center of employment in the largest mall in the US, and
                is adjacent to a large park (Valley forge). There is no
                geological reason why this city will never produce high
                rises, there probably isn't any economic reason that it
                won't produce high rise living, as their is a large
                commuter base going from Philly out to KOP (and vice
                versa).

                At Philadelphia population density levels of
                Philadelphia (95th in the country) KOP would have a
                population of ~100,000, but zoning laws prohibit this.
                We can't calculate exactly what would happen if KOP
                dropped it more restrictive ordinances, but just that
                80k increase without a boost to the surrounding area
                would likely cause property value in Philly to fall (or
                stop growing at its current rate).

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466248>
      *
        Jack says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 2:52 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466274>
        ~new~

        I’m not sure exactly what you are thinking when you suggest
        unions drive up the costs of infrastructure, but on its face
        this theory seems inconsistent with the much higher unionization
        rates in some European countries, and their generally higher
        power across the board.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465764>
127.
    David M. Perlman says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:36 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465774>
    ~new~

    Hey Scott, great post. Here’s a link to a research paper, John A.
    List, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, titled “Does Market
    Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?” It appeared as part of the
    perennial debate between classic market economists and behavioral
    economists. The classical economics are always resentful that the
    psychology types keep winning the Nobel Prize for contradicting
    classical economic theory, especially Kahneman and Tversky. In that
    vein, there are all these observable behaviors of market anomalies,
    like the Endowment Effect, and others. List and others made the
    claim that many of the anomalies only appeared because, basically,
    people didn’t know what they were doing. In this paper he shows that
    the endowment effect disappears in markets of experienced traders.
    The converse is interesting, because it reinforces that markets
    consisting of non-experts will likely be very imperfect.

    The “cost disease” you discuss here is clearly in the category of
    “market anomalies”. Whatever the reason behind it, on the face of
    it, it’s clear that these are examples of situations where market
    forces aren’t working the way they’re supposed to. I would observe
    that one thing these examples all have in common is that they are
    all markets that EVERYONE is in. In other words, they are very much
    composed of non-experts.

    I sent your post to a friend, and he pointed out that in sectors
    with well-functioning markets, prices drop. I think it’s clear that
    you imply this in the post; you seem to be asking, why are these
    things all non-well-functioning markets? What is it about these
    markets? You gave a partial answer by describing your own
    experience, which is that people are making bad (i.e. economically
    sub-optimal) decisions in these markets. I would argue that all the
    markets you list here are markets where the customer would naturally
    think that “their life depends on it”, in one way or another, which
    is definitely a recipe for emotionally-driven, non-rational decision
    making.

    What would it take to get to a place where these markets functioned
    better? Some people argue for better incentives. Like, health care
    where the individual always pays a certain percentage of the cost,
    so they have incentive to make economic decisions about care
    tradeoffs. It gets very complicated, though, because people clearly
    don’t have the expertise to feel comfortable making all those
    decisions themselves, and indeed the medical system is set up to
    assume that someone else is supposed to be making the decisions
    (like in your example of the person who sees a psychiatrist after a
    heart attack). It’s not clear that making every individual make more
    of their own medical decisions would lead to a better situation,
    given that people are definitely not experts…

    And so on with the other fields.

    The List 2003 article:
    https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/118/1/41/1917048/Does-Market-Experience-Eliminate-Market-Anomalies

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
128.
    Matthias says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 7:42 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465776>
    ~new~

    As a programmer, I can’t complain about about my after inflationary
    earning trajectory.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
129.
    MostlyCredibleHulk says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 8:21 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465789>
    ~new~

    I can’t help wondering, if so many important things raise so sharply
    in cost in “constant” – i.e. CPI-adjusted – dollars, does it mean
    our CPI calculations are inadequate or maybe are not fit for the
    purpose we’re trying to use them (measuring the costs of things
    around us)? Or the other important things got drastically cheaper
    and it averages out?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
130.
    cvxxcvcxbxvcbx says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 8:54 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465794>
    ~new~

    Nobodies tuition funded Milo Yiannopoulos, his fee was paid by the
    Berkeley College Republicans.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        BBA says:	
        February 10, 2017 at 11:35 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465824>
        ~new~

        BCR is an official student group, which means it gets funded by
        the student government, which in turn gets its money from a
        mandatory fee charged on all students at the university. Okay,
        technically it’s not “tuition”, it’s a different line item on
        the same bill, but close enough.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465794>
131.
    Rhys F says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 9:51 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465806>
    ~new~

    It strikes me as odd- and probably very important- that this seems
    to be extremely US-specific. In Australia we have similar
    demographics, comparable GDP/capita and a lot of shared culture with
    the USA, yet have far cheaper education and healthcare (for the same
    or better outcomes). Taiwan is a bit more different, but not so
    different that you’d expect a 50-fold difference in efficiency for
    major infrastructure projects; the same basic argument applies to
    differences with the EU as well.
    So either:
    a) something has changed in the last 50 years in the US that hasn’t
    changed (as much) anywhere else (political? Cultural? Occult? Who
    knows?),
    b) everywhere’s suffering the same cost disease and to the same
    extent, but the rest of the world besides the US is subsidised by
    the US (I’ve heard this argument in relation to healthcare- the US
    absorbs the initial cost of new treatments, for some reason),
    c) the US has always been more expensive that everywhere else but
    that was previously masked by, say, really high productivity gains
    that have now stopped, or
    d) literally anything else, this is really complicated and I am a
    simple biotech student with no actual knowledge about what I’m saying.
    I like option A politically because it’s the simplest problem and
    the simplest solution (in the sense that it’s limited to one nation,
    which is easier to change than the entire global economy), and also
    because whenever I hear Americans complain about the costs of
    healthcare or uni my gut response is always ‘I don’t know what
    you’re doing wrong but whatever it is we’re doing it right, so
    seriously just move here, apart from the shoddy internet and regular
    bushfires it’s great I swear’ so if A turns out to be correct I get
    to feel all fuzzy and validated inside.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 2:04 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465843>
        ~new~

        Apologies if I’m stating the obvious; your comment on (B) about
        healthcare makes it seem like the mechanism by which the US is
        subsidizing foreign healthcare is mysterious and possibly
        mythical, so let me try to provide an explanation. In a
        nutshell, it’s a matter of the difference between R&D costs and
        marginal production costs.

        Medical treatments, devices and drugs are /extremely/ expensive
        and time-consuming to develop. In addition to the many hundreds
        or thousands of approaches that need to be tried to develop a
        successful product, the process of proving that the new product
        is both safe and effective costs an enormous amount of time and
        effort. A new drug costs between $150 million and $2 billion
        <https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/examination-clinical-trial-costs-and-barriers-drug-development#>
        (depending on risk, possible side effects and interactions) and
        about 7 years to get approved for sale by the FDA — note that
        these costs /do not include R&D/. This is just the /testing/.
        (Also note that these numbers aren’t inflated estimates provided
        by the pharmaceutical lobby; this is the US government’s /own/
        estimate.)

        But these are costs that only have to be borne once. When a new
        product has been tested and certified, the cost of production is
        usually insignificant by comparison (pennies per pill for most
        drugs). In economic terms we would call this a high fixed cost
        <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fixed_cost> and a low marginal
        cost <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_cost>. Moreover,
        every drug, technique or device has a limited lifespan of
        intellectual property protection via patents: you can profit
        from it for a time, but in 20 years, anyone else is going to be
        able to manufacture your device for the marginal cost and you’ll
        have lost the opportunity to recoup your R&D costs.

        Because the fixed costs are so high, the developer has to be
        confident that it can recoup its investment from selling the
        product /before time runs out/. Now, if the condition that the
        drug treats is common enough, you can sell enough pills to make
        your money back within the patent window, even if you’re selling
        to price controlled countries. Sure, maybe you’d like to make
        more money on each pill, but you’ll still turn a tidy profit.

        Where this breaks down is when the drug is extremely costly to
        develop and has very few potential customers. Let’s say you’ve
        spent $300 million on R&D and discovered a new drug that cures
        Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
        <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creutzfeldt–Jakob_disease>. You
        rush out to patent it, but now need to spend another $2 billion
        to get it approved for sale, since this is a very complex
        condition with relatively few patients who can be used for clean
        scientific trials. By the time the testing process is complete,
        your 20 year patent will only have 12 years remaining. In 12
        years, you need to sell enough pills to recoup $2.3 billion just
        to break even. The problem is that CJD is very rare, affecting
        only about one person in a million each year. With a global
        population of 7 billion, this means we’ll get about 7000 cases a
        year. Assuming you sell your treatment to /every single person
        on the planet with the disease for 12 years straight/, you’ll
        need to sell it for $27,380 /just to break even/.

        If you’re a drug company CEO and looking at those numbers, you
        can also probably presume that your shareholders will be rather
        upset with you if all you did with their $2.3 billion was /break
        even/.

        Now price controls come into the mix and make it worse. “That’s
        outrageous!”, says the government of India. “$27,380 is 40 times
        our median income!” So India declares that you can only sell
        your drug for $1000 per course of treatment — still a
        ludicrously high price from their perspective, since it’s 150%
        of their median income, but they acknowledge that it is
        life-saving, so it’s worth it. Okay, so scratch off India’s 1/7
        of the world population; you’re only going to get at most $12
        million in our 12 year window from our CJD sufferers there. Now
        we need to get the rest of the $2.3 billion from elsewhere.

        “Hey, wait a minute,” says the Chinese government. “You agreed
        to sell the drug to India for $1000 per treatment, so why are
        you trying to charge us so much more?” You point out that the
        median income in China is about $10k USD/year, around 15 times
        what India’s is. “Okay,” they say, “so we’ll buy it from you for
        $10,000 per treatment.” China then subtly implies that if you’re
        not willing to do business with the government, they will
        regrettably not be able to assist with vigorous enforcement of
        your patent if lawless compounding facilities in Chinese
        territory happen to appropriate your formula and start producing
        copies of your medication
        <http://www.nbcnews.com/id/18490388/ns/health-aids/t/brazil-break-merck-aids-drug-patent/>.
        Okay, so that means our maximum possible return from China is
        going to be $156 million. But that’s progress! Now we just need
        to come up with another $2.1 billion from somewhere, but we’ve
        already ruled out nearly 1/3 of the world’s population between
        just those two countries. Oh, right, and then we have to figure
        out how to make a profit so the shareholders don’t fire us.

        By the time you work through all of this, you’re down to the
        United States last. You’ve worked through the price controls all
        around the globe and figured out that you can cover $1.5 billion
        of your development costs (Europe and Australia’s wealthier
        citizens helped a lot), but that still means you need to make up
        $800 million plus /all of your profit/ on the US alone. With 300
        million citizens, that means we can expect 300 cases of CJD per
        year; over 12 years, that means we have to get $800 million
        plus, say, 15% profit margin on our initial $2.3 billion out of
        3600 unlucky Americans.

        And so we sell it for $318,000 per treatment in the US. Because
        someone has to foot the bill, and Americans are the only ones
        who will pay for it. Oh, right, and this whole analysis still
        assumes we can sell the drug to /every single CJD sufferer on
        the planet for the next 12 years/ and that all of our marketing
        and production costs are free. And it ignores the fact that we
        could have dumped the investment money in a low-risk index fund
        and made 7% annually, which is to say /twenty times more money/
        than we made in profit from this drug. (We are so fired.)

        But note what the alternative is: /not developing the drug at
        all/ because we couldn’t even break even, much less make a
        profit. The cost of this obscenely-expensive drug is going to
        save the lives of 84,000 people who would have otherwise
        certainly died over just the 12 years of the patent, and go on
        saving another 7,000 people (and growing, as the world
        population grows) /every year thereafter/.

        So this is how (and why) the US subsidizes the rest of the
        world’s medical treatment. By working as the last and only
        wealthy, un-price-controlled market in the world and being
        willing to pay obscene prices, we enable drugs to be developed
        that otherwise never could be because there wouldn’t be enough
        of a market. All of the countries with price controls are
        free-riding on this, relying on the fact that companies will
        continue to develop new medical technology as long as they can
        sell it here.

        There are a number of possible ways that this could be addressed
        to try to reduce the burden on the US, but there’s no getting
        around the fact that anything we do here will just be shifting
        the cost-burden onto other, poorer countries. I’ll save
        discussions on that for another post, though, as this is already
        obscenely long for a comment.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465806>
          o
            AnonEEmous says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 5:06 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466015>
            ~new~

            Excuse me, but there seems to be a serious flaw in your
            analysis: namely, the FDA is unique to the U.S.A., and most
            of the cost seems to be coming from the FDA’s testing costs.

            Now, obviously you picked those numbers at semi-random. But
            if the FDA really is as significant a portion of the cost as
            you make it out to be in that one example, then it’s more
            like the USA screwing itself over, and possibly also
            subsidizing the rest of the world.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465843>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 5:37 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466020>
                ~new~

                Yes, that’s an important point. This is a chicken-or-egg
                problem; I used the FDA approval numbers because they’re
                the benchmark standard for the world right now; if you
                can win FDA approval, most other countries will require
                minimal additional regulatory testing. The EMA (the EU’s
                FDA-equivalent) has a similar approval process, but they
                will fast-track any medication that’s already
                FDA-approved without going through the same formal
                tests. Since basically all medications are targeted for
                the US as their primary market for the reasons I
                outlined above, this makes numbers for the EMA approval
                process as a standalone very hard to come by; I doubt
                such figures even really exist because any
                pharmaceutical designed for sale in the EU market but
                not the US one is likely to be an extreme outlier for
                some reason. (As I understand it, basically all drugs
                that currently fall into this category are simply
                generics made off of well-known formulas; testing is for
                bioequivalence of preparation, not unknown
                pharmacological effects.)

                That said, if the EU process is as rigorous as the FDA
                one (and I’m sure it is, after the thalidomide debacle),
                I would expect the costs to be similar.

                As a counterpoint, though, let’s assume that the FDA’s
                approval process is 75% waste and that with heroic
                efforts you could cut the R&D+certification cost of your
                drug down to $800m. Now factor in the item I
                specifically said I omitted: that your total returns
                need to exceed what you could get from just taking your
                initial budget and shoving it in a low-risk index fund
                for 20 years.

                That would mean you’d need to return $2.89 billion on
                your $800 million initial investment, which is higher
                than the $2.68 billion I used for the simplistic “+15%
                profit” calculation in the original example. So even if
                you assume massive waste in the FDA numbers, the real
                outcome is still even worse than the example I gave.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466015>
                  #
                    AnonEEmous says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:04 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466153>
                    ~new~

                    “Now factor in the item I specifically said I
                    omitted: that your total returns need to exceed what
                    you could get from just taking your initial budget
                    and shoving it in a low-risk index fund for 20 years.”

                    Sorry, didn’t catch that part specifically. But I
                    still have to ask where these numbers are coming
                    from. Moreover, I’m not sold at all that the EU’s
                    specifications are as tough as America’s, because
                    the FDA really is something else.

                    I do acknowledge quite fully that America tends to
                    subsidize Europe and other nations in this regard.
                    But it’s also worth noting that some of it is
                    undoubtedly self-inflicted. And when you put it in
                    numbers in the way you did, well…you get the idea.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466020>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:20 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466157>
                    ~new~

                    The FDA approval process costs were pulled from the
                    HHS report I linked in the original post. The rough
                    estimate of how much the R&D costs was a lowball of
                    the number given in this study
                    <https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/cost-to-develop-new-pharmaceutical-drug-now-exceeds-2-5b/>.

                    Hate to say it, but if you were hoping I pulled
                    made-up numbers out of my ass to exaggerate the
                    problem, the truth is that I deliberately
                    /understated/ just how bad it is, because the
                    reality is so terrible that you can use very low-end
                    estimates and still produce numbers that will shock
                    most people.

                    Even the disease was picked to be something that’s
                    rare (because this problem doesn’t apply to, say,
                    male pattern baldness cures, which have an enormous
                    potential market) but not /that/ rare. You can see
                    how bad the math is for a disease that
                    (theoretically; actual incidence rates are lower due
                    to specific risk factors and vulnerabilities)
                    affects 7000 people a year — now imagine how bad it
                    is for a disease that only affects 5 people a year
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progeria>. Even if
                    someone was handed a formula for a cure on stone
                    tablets from heaven, it would /never/ be profitable
                    to actually produce it under our current system.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466020>
132.
    jackgriffith says:	
    February 10, 2017 at 11:37 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465825>
    ~new~

    couldn’t it just be a mix of inflation and inequality? inflation
    weakens the dollar while inequality concentrates those weakening
    dollars in fewer hands. this would be ironic, since inflation is
    supposed to penalize savers. but if inequality is being driven by
    intelligence, it could just mean smart people are acquiring
    resources more efficiently than they’re being taxed out of them. at
    the same time, people below them are spending more to keep up. since
    they aren’t as efficient, they have to spend more to get the same
    results. but each time they do, their superiors easily up the ante.
    this isn’t hard to imagine, considering how many people bristle at
    the idea of intelligence; maybe they see themselves as temporarily
    embarrassed geniuses?

    the second chart seems to drive this home. tuition has exploded in
    price, almost like people are frenzied to get it. food? not so much.
    yet information is as cheap as ever. why pay so much for it? why pay
    anything for it?

    it’s almost as if there are people saying, “my college degree was
    expensive, yet worthless in practice. therefore, we should subsidize
    college.”

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
133.
    vakusdrake says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 12:58 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465837>
    ~new~

    A bit of a nitpick but:

        the first mobile phone cost $4,000 – about $10,000 in today’s
        dollars. It was also a gigantic piece of crap. Today you can get
        a much better phone for $100.

    You are only thinking of smartphones, you can get a prepaid flip
    phone from walmart for 5$ that will still be infinitely better than
    old phones (for instance it will have features for alarms and a
    calculator). Even that’s overpriced because you could probably buy a
    flip phone for less than a dollar in africa (remember those stats on
    how the vast majority of the world’s population has phones:
    http://newsfeed.time.com/2013/03/25/more-people-have-cell-phones-than-toilets-u-n-study-shows/)
    Phone plans are similarly vastly overpriced (well at least basic
    ones are), considering the cost of prepaid sim cards in africa.

    Well this started out as a nitpick, but somehow became just another
    point about how everything in the US (and to a lesser extent many
    other first world nations) is horribly overpriced and inefficient.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
134.
    statsman says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 1:10 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465838>
    ~new~

    Schools:

    1. Class sizes are a lot smaller. My 4th grade class photo in 1964
    had 46 students. Probably one or two were away sick. The evidence
    that class sizes make a difference is very thin,. Below 5 yes, above
    45 yes, but there is a huge range where there is no apparent
    difference. Visiting my old school a few years ago for 40th reunion
    the classrooms looked like the first class compartment in a 747
    versus our economy class or worse.

    2. There are a lot more admin support people. My old public school
    now has two (2) “community liaison” people i,.e. PR. The bottom line
    was half the students and 50% more staff – no counting staff at head
    office. And worse outcomes BTW.

    3. Streaming is a lot less common (e.g. not done at all in many
    places). This makes for less efficient teaching due to the wider
    ability ranges. So whatever small benefit from smaller classes was
    lost by eliminating streaming.

    Business: I think he underestimates the resources consumed by
    regulations. In my last 5 years as a software architect for , more
    than half our IT spend was on regulatory compliance projects.This
    was hundreds of millions a year, for one bank. And not counting the
    substantial compliance work within other projects.

    It is not just direct costs but “not doing that, too hard”
    opportunity costs. Medicine is ripe for disruption except that the
    regulators will kill you (e.g. 23andme).

    Amdahl’s law states that in any system, the parts whose efficiency
    you cannot improve eventually come to dominate the overall
    performance and cost. He was talking about supercomputers then but
    it applies to society as a whole. The parts that are not under
    pressure to get more efficient don’t, and come to dominate costs.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
135.
    carsonmcneil says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 1:10 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465839>
    ~new~

        Was your parents’ college even noticeably worse than yours?

    Without question, across the board. I think there’s tons of clear
    evidence for what Scott is talking about, but at the same time I
    feel like we kind of ignored the fact that everyone just /straight
    up learns more/ in school now, in a way not well reflected in test
    scores. If I received my parents’ education, I would be totally
    unqualified to do anything, because I would have a 70’s
    understanding of math, science, and technology. There’s an unspoken
    assumption in the educational aspect of this analysis: that teaching
    people until they reach the level of education necessary to function
    should require the same amount of effort now as it did in the 50’s.
    But I think that might not be true, because, at least in technical
    fields, you simply have to learn more to be competitive.
    Oscilloscopes, computer clusters, PCR, DNA sequencing… All didn’t
    even exist when my dad went to college. All necessary and valuable
    parts of my education. All very expensive.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Anonymous says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 5:34 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465890>
        ~new~

            I feel like we kind of ignored the fact that everyone just
            straight up learns more in school now, in a way not well
            reflected in test scores.

        My impression of my time at the prison called the educational
        system was that they are on a trend of dumbing shit down,
        because the intake of students can’t handle it. The way the
        elder professors told it, we learned and were held up to a
        standard much inferior to that of the previous generations.

            If I received my parents’ education, I would be totally
            unqualified to do anything, because I would have a 70’s
            understanding of math, science, and technology.

        Seems exaggerated, unless you’re literally Elon Musk, in which
        case I apologize, Mr. Musk. If I received my parents’ education,
        I’d be somewhat worse off on computer skills (but still would
        have learned the same basic electronics), but that’s about it.

        Regardless, the point of (non-vocational) education isn’t to
        cram your head full of stuff, or to give you specific skills.
        It’s to:
        a) point out exceptionally capable units from the population,
        b) give average individuals the basic capability to earn a
        taxable income,
        c) teach the more exceptional people how to assimilate knowledge
        quickly.

        (This list is not exhaustive, but the other purposes are
        irrelevant here.)

        I’d wager that if you took an engineering graduate from the 40s,
        handed him a modern programming textbook, and told him to learn
        that because he was starting next week, you would get superior
        results than if you took an engineering graduate from the 00s
        and did the same with a 40s era electronic computing textbook.
        The 40s guy would probably be amazed at how simple and
        straightforward things now are, and the 00s guy would have
        trouble coping with how much he would have to do by hand.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465839>
      *
        FacelessCraven says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 9:50 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466104>
        ~new~

        @carsonmcnell – “If I received my parents’ education, I would be
        totally unqualified to do anything, because I would have a 70’s
        understanding of math, science, and technology.”

        I was homeschooled from 4th grade on, and not very attentively
        either. My parents made some moderate effort to catch me up on
        math for the ACT, but for the most part I remember just reading,
        playing video games, practicing writing and drawing, making
        knives, and generally doing as I pleased. I appear to have
        suffered no serious harm as a result.

        How exactly has math or science changed since the 70s? What
        training in technology do schools provide that one can’t get
        from tutorials on youtube or, failing that, bittorrent?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465839>
          o
            Mark V Anderson says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 12:57 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466243>
            ~new~

                How exactly has math or science changed since the 70s?

            Yes, I am really curious about this also. I went to college
            in the ’70’s, and apparently these young kids have all this
            great training that I missed. Okay, it’s true that I took
            mostly business courses, but I did take some calculus and
            physics courses. Obviously I didn’t have the kind of
            software courses that are applicable today, but I’ve often
            read in this blog and elsewhere that computer training is
            the one area where it is clear that a college degree often
            is NOT needed.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466104>
              +
                baconbacon says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 1:38 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466246>
                ~new~

                Some fields have changed enormously, the central dogma
                in Biology was 1 gene = 1 protein for a long time. Turns
                out that is completely wrong (but still allowed for a
                lot of knowledge to be gained using that assumption).

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466243>
                  #
                    Anonymous says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:35 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466266>
                    ~new~

                    OTOH, that kind of extremely narrow trivia is
                    entirely useless to the grand majority of people who
                    go to school. Even Mendelian genetics would be lost
                    on most of them.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466246>
                  #
                    John Schilling says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:06 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466280>
                    ~new~

                    I am fairly certain that when people talk about a
                    “1970s education” or the like, they do not mean
                    using literal 1970s textbooks and instructing the
                    teachers to ignore everything that has been learned
                    since 1970. They mean using educational techniques
                    and institutions similar to(*) those of the 1970s to
                    teach modern knowledge and understanding.

                    *Presumably the computer science classes will use
                    modern commodity desktop machines rather than dumb
                    terminals linked to the mainframe in the basement.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466246>
                  #
                    Anonymous says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:20 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466291>
                    ~new~

                    @John

                    But it’s close enough for general education. It’s
                    probably close enough for anything short of masters’
                    and doctorates.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466246>
          o
            The Nybbler says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:58 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466317>
            ~new~

            If we’re talking about primary and secondary education, you
            wouldn’t have computer classes _at all_ in the 1970s in most
            places.

            I can’t see math changing, though. Nor physics nor what’s
            called “earth science” (heck, maybe you could actually teach
            more of those subjects if you removed some of the
            environmental advocacy which has replaced them).

            Astronomy has changed quite a bit, even in the broad
            outlines (e.g. cosmic inflation, dark matter, extrasolar
            planets), but that wouldn’t impact teaching techniques… nor
            have much practical relevance for most students.

            I suppose history has gotten a little bit longer; they
            certainly never taught about the fall of the Soviet Union in
            my high school.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466104>
      *
        DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:44 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466307>
        ~new~

            If I received my parents’ education, I would be totally
            unqualified to do anything, because I would have a 70’s
            understanding of math, science, and technology.

        The conventional wisdom I hear from professors at non-elite
        schools is that they now have to dumb down their introductory
        classes to teach what the students used to know coming in.
        That’s the opposite of your pattern.

        A 70’s understanding of math would be adequate for any
        profession other than being a mathematician, or perhaps in an
        academic field with a preference for putting its arguments in
        the latest mathematical form to make them sound novel. What do
        you think has changed in the sort of math people learn in
        college since the 70’s?

        The same is true for the science learned in college in any field
        other than the one you plan to make a career in–and you probably
        learn the cutting edge stuff there mostly in grad school.
        Newtonian physics, classical E&M, statistical mechanics, … all
        that stuff goes back well before 1970. There would be more new
        stuff in biology, but do you really think you have to learn that
        in college to go to med school or grad school in the life sciences?

        Technology has changed more–but that doesn’t mean harder to
        learn, just different. Programming in any modern language, to
        take an extreme example, is a lot easier than writing machine
        code or even assembly.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465839>
          o
            Nornagest says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:51 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466315>
            ~new~

            I’ve read my dad’s college math textbooks from the
            Seventies. They are essentially identical to my college math
            textbooks from the 2000s, except in writing style. But I
            went to a pretty good, though not quite elite, college;
            maybe it’s different on the generic state college level.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466307>
              +
                Controls Freak says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 5:29 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466346>
                ~new~

                Lil’ Rudin is still pretty much the standard analysis
                text for late undergrad/early grad, and it was written
                in the 50s. The third edition (what I used in school
                within the last decade) was published in ’76, but I
                doubt it changed much back then, either.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466315>
136.
    Steve Sailer says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 1:13 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465840>
    ~new~

    Regarding education costs, a couple of things that have changed
    since the 1970s are

    1. A proliferation of staffers relative to teachers, both in schools
    and at the district level. Colleges now have an impressive number of
    psychological counselors, diversity consultants, and admissions
    staffs seem much larger.

    2. The physical plant is much nicer. Most Baby Boomers in Southern
    California, for example, went to school in shacks, typically without
    air conditioning. In this century, however, it’s been common for new
    public schools to cost up to $578 million, in the case of the Robert
    Kennedy school on Wilshire Blvd. Similarly, college buildings
    erected in the last 30 years are much nicer than the ones erected in
    the Postwar modernist/brutalist era.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
137.
    trevormmurphy says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 3:33 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465860>
    ~new~

    I try to avoid making an ask that I can’t do myself, especially when
    it’s a modest ask, but I’m not up for a research project these days.
    So here’s a request for future discussion:

    Can we add simultaneous statistics for the changing # of students
    moving through college / # of adults taking healthcare benefits / #
    of subway miles laid / # of houses built / # of doctors, nurses, and
    professors moving through the system?

    It’s hard to get a clear understanding of the economic flows when
    we’re just looking at the one dimension (price) shown on these
    graphs. We really need the other dimension (quantity). I think Scott
    Sumner warns against “reasoning [just] from a price change.”

    Like … I’m guessing that in re: college we’d see a big increase in #
    of students moving through the system over the same time period. But
    maybe not. The former statistic would suggest a supply side
    issue—there’s some huge barrier to opening a new university—and that
    we should aim our solutions at that issue. The latter statistic
    would suggest … that something really weird is going on.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        moridinamael says:	
        February 13, 2017 at 11:35 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466703>
        ~new~

        In addition to this, it would be useful to look at the costs of
        things relative to other things. Cost in
        inflation-adjusted-dollars already is a cost “relative to other
        things”, except it’s an opaque grab-bag of index commodities.
        Comparing the relative costs of specific things versus other
        specific things, with an eye to “normalizing out” specific
        factors such as what would be effected by

        – technological growth
        – globalization
        – population growth
        – “wealth inequality”
        – etc.

        might give a cleaner picture of where costs are actually
        increasing. Or maybe more appropriately, what stuff is more
        expensive in some more meangingful global sense.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465860>
138.
    grendelkhan says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 4:03 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465872>
    ~new~

    I have an anecdote which may describe some of the ‘it’s more
    expensive but it doesn’t show up as a line-item’ stuff you’re
    mentioning here.

    The Department of Veterans’ Affairs processes a lot of claims. I’ve
    seen some of the claim files; they can take up several linear feet
    of shelf space. I’m told that, by law, case reviewers must review
    the /entire/ file before making a decision on a benefits claim; to
    review only the updates since the last decision is called
    “top-sheeting”. The VA has also been under fire for having an
    ever-growing claims backlog.

    I imagine that the no-top-sheeting rule came about because a claims
    adjuster made a mistake, something tragic happened, and a very
    concerned Senator passed a law to make sure it could never happen
    again. And now we’re spending /way/ more time and money on
    processing claims, for a small marginal benefit, just like knocking
    down an accident rate another order of magnitude at a terribly high
    cost.

    The pattern looks like this: an organization that tried to do
    something like this would have failed without the extra resources
    available. But they don’t now. So they expand to utilize them, and
    our surplus is eaten. I guess figuring out how to fix this is /the/
    problem.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
139.
    Anonymous says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 5:19 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465887>
    ~new~

    It seems like a phenomenon without a clear central cause.

    There’s a bunch of big things, mostly relating to misregulation –
    for example the non-bankruptable student debt system that creates
    the incentive for colleges to raise prices ad infinitum because
    banks will gladly give loans that are near-certain to be repaid
    eventually, or the American lawsuit system which makes
    posterior-fortification a highly prudent occupation seeing as the
    alternative is to lose all your money, or the regulations on
    medication and patents which decrease supply and inflate price of
    medicine, etc, etc. But overall, it seems a complex interaction of
    incredibly many small things, mostly related to everything being
    interdependent on a huge amount of external moving parts
    (necessitating hoop-jumping), and the growth of inefficiency that
    simply follows the growth of the central bureaucratic apparatus and
    the amount of regulations it produces (some of which isn’t even bad
    for its amount, but for its direct effects).

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Anonymous says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 9:18 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465904>
        ~new~

        Jim seems largely in agreement
        <http://blog.jim.com/economics/the-cost-disease/>!

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465887>
140.
    bkearns123 says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 7:19 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465895>
    ~new~

    Excellent post.

    One commonality in the examples cited is
    disintermediation/subsidies. College is paid for by a third party,
    and financed by generous government loans. Generous in the sense
    that they are easy to get, not easy to get out of. Health care has
    massive tax subsidies, and for a good period of time felt “free” to
    employees. Public schooling is paid for indirectly.

    Regarding the section on risk aversion, I happen to be in the
    playground business. The most common injury is broken bones from a
    fall. Consequently, our industry has ended up with poured in place
    surfacing, which costs 10x as much as mulch or pea gravel. It is
    wonderful stuff, but really increases the cost of the playground.
    Again, no one pays directly for their playground, and the paying
    party cannot risk not being in tune with the regulations.

    Markets cannot function if the risk reward relationship is not direct.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
141.
    fc123 says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 11:04 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465918>
    ~new~

    In all of these problem sectors it seems the resources consumed in
    each industry has shifted to servicing and extending the definition
    of the marginal ‘customer’. This can explain I think some of the above

    E.g.. 40 years ago hospitals received 100 customers. Ranked,
    patients 1-20 died. And no one really tried to save them (some
    comfort but that was it). Today they are trying (are obliged) to try
    to save patients no 5-15 (the 85 year old with triple bypass, 20
    week premie). The total no of staff needed for this task swamps
    increases in individual productivity. You just need more people,
    even if they each are more productive or trained than in the pasts.
    So salaries for each does not go up that much, there are just more
    of them, total cost go up, and outcomes over the patients treated
    are somewhat but not much better (some now make it but some fraction
    still die). Hence medical curve shows some improvement but not 1:1
    with cost.

    In education, in the 1950-1970s we could afford to socially promote
    non-academically inclined students, not really expend effort on them
    as long as they kept quiet in class, then have them leave at age 16
    to go work at Ford. Universities could count on getting the higher
    performing students. Today, we have to deliver much weaker students
    all the way to the end of high school, also force many into college.
    And ALL the extra resources go to get this new lower end close to
    what used to be the minimal university student performance. The top
    cohort gets little extra resources and has not really improved.
    Hence, the scores across the new ‘extended’ student population stays
    flat.

    I base this partly on what I have seen from my wife (engineering
    professor at top university), resources are heavily consumed by the
    lower performing students, top students have better opportunities
    than 20 years ago but in general the resources are much less focused
    on them than on the marginal students.

    So if you assume these industries for whatever reason shifted focus
    to servicing deeper into the tail of the population aptitude/effort
    over the years (I am not saying this is good/bad, was for social
    reasons, for humanistic reasons or making any comment), this would
    very much explain the overall cost rise, coupled with the lack of
    desired improvement in statistics measured across the population
    that now gets services as a whole.

    In short, in the US we define policies that drive costs based on the
    tail of the population, but we experience performance on the
    average. As an immigrant from a third world country I think this is
    a big difference often invisible to the US-born citizens I talk to.
    Maybe why this is a great country and I am here. All I can say is
    that it is a world view that is not common world wide. Where I grew
    up, No Child Left Behind law would have been designed as 1 Child
    Left Behind. There just were not the resources, but more important,
    it was just more socially acceptable to just halve the no of slots
    halfway through an academic program, for example.

    So I guess the question is why are we so focused on pushing services
    into the tails and will we continue to do so? Does society really
    benefit from having a larger fraction of the population capable of
    doing crappy algebra? Clearly there will be some point where the
    cost becomes prohibitive and it will stop: maybe that is what we are
    seeing now. But it is stunning that this was a 50 year process — if
    the dynamics in social policy “markets” are that slow it is going to
    be really difficult to manage.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 6:23 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466034>
        ~new~

        This is really excellent commentary and definitely something
        that as a society, we don’t like to talk about. The idea that
        sooner or later, we have to declare some people “unsalvageable”
        because of the cost of servicing them is cultural anathema in
        America.

        I would suggest it’s primarily a consequence of having a few
        generations in which the educated upper-middle class (who are
        primarily the ones debating public policy) have never
        experienced resource scarcity. Spend some time in China, where
        mass famines happened in living memory, and you see a much more
        hard-nosed and realistic approach. There’s certainly no
        “everyone can have everything they want whether or not they’re
        willing or able to pay for it” idealism there.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465918>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 7:35 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466054>
            ~new~

            Alternate theory for the case of health: it is a consequence
            of the power of a private insurance lobby. The UK and Canada
            fit your criterion (low scarcity) and yet we all rolled our
            eyes when “death panels” became a talking point, as though
            you could run a healthcare system that funded everything.
            There is an incentive for health insurance companies to
            produce anti-public-healthcare feelings, and a strategy for
            this can be to focus on the tail where it doesn’t perform.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466034>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:34 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466078>
                ~new~

                I’m curious, how well understood is this really in the
                UK? I recall a story
                <https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-08-23/health-care-is-a-business-not-a-right>
                Megan McArdle told of being interviewed on British radio:

                    At one point I found myself discussing NICE, the
                    British agency that issues treatment guidelines for
                    the NHS. NICE looks at how many
                    quality-adjusted-life-years a treatment provides,
                    and compares it to the cost. If it costs too much
                    per year — at the time, they were leery of
                    treatments that were above the 20,000 pound to
                    30,000 pound range — then NICE will generally not
                    recommend it.

                    America, I said, could never do something like that;
                    our fractured political system, and public
                    sentiment, make it very difficult. Britain had
                    achieved cost-effective treatment for everyone, at
                    the cost of some people missing very expensive
                    treatments that might help them. I was rather
                    congratulating myself on this answer, because NICE
                    is beloved of health wonks everywhere; Obamacare’s
                    Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB) is an
                    attempt to sort of replicate it. Pointing out
                    something the British health system can do that the
                    American system can’t, and doing so in dryly factual
                    tones, seemed like a good way to endear myself to
                    the British audience.

                    The other guest, a British health official,
                    interrupted to basically accuse me of lying; the
                    British health system, he said, did no such thing.

                    Now I reiterate: I had not called NICE a death
                    panel, or said that it was bad; I had simply
                    described what NICE does, which is keep the NHS from
                    blowing its budget on very expensive treatments that
                    deliver relatively little value per pound spent. You
                    can read NICE describing what NICE does on its
                    website; the description is not significantly
                    different from the one I gave. Being told that this
                    was flat out wrong was surreal. Things got even more
                    surreal when I began again to explain what NICE
                    does, thinking that perhaps I had been unclear, and
                    the host interrupted me and said something like “As
                    you know, that’s false.”

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466054>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 9:14 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466088>
                    ~new~

                    The idea that people under national health insurance
                    schemes think of them in fuzzy altruistic terms
                    seems right to me, though it is hard to evaluate
                    McArdle’s story without knowing what the two people
                    she was talking to thought was the case. Every
                    health official must know that not everything is
                    funded or can be under the NHS, and they must know
                    that people make decisions about it. This makes me
                    think there was some difference of emphasis or
                    miscommunication not conveyed in the story. To
                    criticize myself though, a lot of USA people rolled
                    their eyes at “death panels” too. Perhaps the lesson
                    though is that similar popular sentiment exists in
                    all three countries against the idea of people
                    making these decisions, but in the USA that
                    sentiment was successfully mobilized to oppose a
                    public system.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:21 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466194>
                    ~new~

                    The figure for £20,000 a year, as quite clearly
                    explained on that web page, is for _public health
                    interventions_ ; helping the anonymous statistical
                    person who avoids cancer if a GP sends an extra
                    minute lecturing them against smoking.

                    The figure used as a baseline in pricing
                    negotiations with pharmaceutical companies alone is
                    4 x that, and drugs are only one component of costs.

                    The idea that spending on an individual patient
                    stops at anywhere like £20,000 is so obviously false
                    to anyone living in the UK it’s unsurprising the
                    panel reacted the way they did.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 2:32 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466265>
                    ~new~

                    I’m taking this to mean I successfully read between
                    the lines in a one-sided story, and now I am
                    publicly patting myself on the back.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 3:52 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466316>
                    ~new~

                        The idea that spending on an individual patient
                        stops at anywhere like £20,000 is so obviously
                        false to anyone living in the UK it’s
                        unsurprising the panel reacted the way they did.

                    The claim was not £20,000 but £20,000 per QALY. Is
                    that mistaken?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:34 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466329>
                    ~new~

                    @1soru1: From NICE’s own website
                    <https://www.nice.org.uk/news/blog/carrying-nice-over-the-threshold>,
                    written by Sir Andrew Dillon, the chief executive of
                    NICE:

                        Over the last 16 years, we think we’ve found a
                        balance that reflects what the public expect the
                        NHS to do. Our independent committees use a
                        threshold for recommending treatments of between
                        £20,000 and £30,000 per quality adjusted life
                        year. We think it represents a reasonable
                        compromise between ensuring everyone has fair
                        and equitable access to the NHS and enabling
                        access to new and innovative treatments.

                    What website were you referring to? The link McArdle
                    provides in her article is broken, presumably due to
                    a copypasta error.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 4:55 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466337>
                    ~new~

                    There is no meaningful budget for spending on an
                    individual patient, no point at which anyone says
                    ‘your account is out of money, go away and die please’.

                    What there is is a budget, influenced by NICE’s QALY
                    numbers, for building the hospital and buying the
                    machinery and hiring the staff that must be in place
                    before anyone can get treated. If a hospital hasn’t
                    been built, or a specialist not been hired, you
                    can’t use them. If a patient doesn’t get a
                    too-expensive drug, it is not because the budget
                    isn’t there, but the because the drug isn’t. It’s
                    not stocked in the hotel pharmacy; the only way a
                    doctor would physically be able to get hold of it is
                    by ordering it online and charging it to their
                    personal credit card.

                    The result is that with _x_ scanning machines and
                    _y_ average demand you get a scan after a wait of
                    _z_ days. And the theory is to spend whatever money
                    is available so that the cases where ‘z’ is after
                    you are dead is statistically minimized compared to
                    other ways of spending the money.

                    Of course, reality it is more complicated than that,
                    with small-scale health care charities wanting to
                    claim a concrete result like and extra scanning
                    machine, political campaigns to keep local hospitals
                    even in cases the statisticians say a central one
                    would be better, and so on.

                    But arguably the real problem with this approach is
                    that, to the extent it successfully minimizes the
                    pain of a low budget, it leads to a budget lower
                    than it otherwise would be.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 5:40 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466350>
                    ~new~

                        There is no meaningful budget for spending on an
                        individual patient, no point at which anyone
                        says ‘your account is out of money, go away and
                        die please’.

                    You are misreading the claim you object to. It was:

                        NICE looks at how many
                        quality-adjusted-life-years a treatment
                        provides, and compares it to the cost. If it
                        costs too much per year — at the time, they were
                        leery of treatments that were above the 20,000
                        pound to 30,000 pound range — then NICE will
                        generally not recommend it.

                    That’s not a statement about a budget limit on how
                    much will be spent on a single patient. It’s a
                    statement about what the return in QALY has to be
                    per pound of expenditure in order for NICE to
                    recommend a treatment.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 6:14 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466354>
                    ~new~

                    No, by itself it’s a statement that doesn’t make it
                    clear as to what it is talking about (and also says
                    20K per year, not per QALY, which understates the
                    numbers involved in curative treatment by a factor
                    of 30 or so).

                    You and I may both think the two cases are
                    different, but Megan apparently doesn’t:

                    ‘”If you design a formula to deny granny a
                    pacemaker, knowing that this is the intent of the
                    formula, then you’ve killed granny just as surely as
                    if you’d ordered the doctor to do it directly,”

                    https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2009/08/rationing-by-any-other-name/23049/

                    Of course, if you asked an american doctor ‘how many
                    people did you murder this week?’, they would not
                    answer with the number of people they did not admit
                    to a course of non-emergency treatment they had no
                    funds or insurance for. And if you carried on
                    insisting they had actively killed some fraction of
                    those people, they would very likely disagree angrily.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 6:43 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466362>
                    ~new~

                    @1soru1: I think you either did not read what
                    McArdle wrote, or you are deliberately changing the
                    subject to avoid admission of error. She was not
                    talking about NICE budgeting treatments for
                    individuals; she was talking about NICE budgeting
                    treatments that will be available in the NHS as a whole:

                        At one point I found myself discussing NICE, the
                        British agency that issues treatment guidelines
                        for the NHS. NICE looks at how many
                        quality-adjusted-life-years a treatment
                        provides, and compares it to the cost. If it
                        costs too much per year — at the time, they were
                        leery of treatments that were above the 20,000
                        pound to 30,000 pound range — then NICE will
                        generally not recommend it.

                        America, I said, could never do something like
                        that; our fractured political system, and public
                        sentiment, make it very difficult. *Britain had
                        achieved cost-effective treatment for everyone,
                        at the cost of some people missing very
                        expensive treatments that might help them.*

                    This is in fact precisely what happens: general
                    medical care in the UK is good, but the NHS will not
                    cover some “heroic” procedures and medications that
                    are available in the US because the cost-per-QALY is
                    too low. This is not a decision made on an
                    individual basis, and nowhere does McArdle even
                    imply that it is. She leads off her quote by
                    explaining that NICE makes decisions on a
                    system-wide basis by issuing treatment guidelines
                    for the whole NHS.

                    Saying that she is dishonestly talking about
                    treatment “per year” when she has /just specified
                    and defined QALY in the previous sentence/ is only
                    possible with a viciously uncharitable reading that
                    rests entirely on the assumption that she is
                    attempting to confuse the reader with a totally
                    different topic instead of using shorthand for the
                    term she /just defined/.

                        You and I may both think the two cases are
                        different, but Megan apparently doesn’t…

                    The argument that there is a meaningful difference
                    between a program that acts systemically with
                    known-in-advance deleterious consequences for
                    individuals and a program that targets individuals
                    directly for those consequences is laughable, and
                    not something I suspect you would accept in any
                    other context. Or are you declaring your surrender,
                    for all time, of any and all arguments that policies
                    which eliminate welfare measures and subsidies are
                    “targeting the poor”? Or that racially-biased
                    policing policies “target minorities”?

                        Of course, if you asked an american doctor ‘how
                        many people did you murder this week?’, they
                        would not answer with the number of people they
                        did not admit to a course of non-emergency
                        treatment they had no funds or insurance for.

                    First, I would suggest that there is a significant
                    culpability difference between a doctor recommending
                    treatments between options the medical system is
                    equipped to provide, and the bureaucrat designing
                    the program which determines what facilities the
                    medical system will equip. A doctor who says,
                    “treatment X could save you, but no hospitals in the
                    country have the equipment and training to perform
                    it” is not denying you treatment X. The bureaucrat
                    who says, “treatment X is too expensive, therefore
                    we will prohibit hospitals from purchasing the
                    equipment and training staff to perform it” has a
                    much stronger potential liability for making the
                    decision, if anyone — but of course he’s merely
                    operating within the constraints of the system
                    someone else has imposed on him as well.

                    Second, I think you badly misunderstand American
                    medical care; our system will tend to present
                    options in the form of, “here are the things your
                    insurance will pay for. If you want to spend your
                    own money, here are additional options it does not
                    pay for but that we can refer to you to a specialist
                    to perform.” The only time you hit “here are options
                    that exist, but which you cannot obtain” are when
                    the treatments are unapproved by the FDA and
                    therefore not legally available in the country.
                    (Usually, these are experimental treatments that
                    have to be performed in countries with weaker
                    medical liability because the lethality risk is too
                    high.)

                    McArdle’s entire point of comparison is specifically
                    that the American medical system covers a much
                    higher and more expensive number of medical
                    treatments than the NHS because we /don’t/ have a
                    NICE that is measuring their effectiveness by QALY.
                    And she’s arguing that /this is a bad thing/. But
                    also that many Britons either misunderstand or
                    willfully deny the implications of what limiting
                    those treatments would mean.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:47 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466386>
                    ~new~

                    > She was not talking about NICE budgeting
                    treatments for individuals

                    That a pure assumption on your part; you can
                    charitably read that into it, but nothing in _her
                    report of her words_ [1] contradicts the other
                    reading, and the reaction the experts hearing it had
                    supports it.

                    Basic theory-of-mind; everyone involved in a story
                    has to have an internal viewpoint from which their
                    actions make sense. If the experts disagreed with
                    what Megan claimed to have said, what would they
                    have claimed instead as the truth of the situation?
                    That NICE doesn’t exist, that budgets are infinite?

                    [1] If you can dig out an actual transcript, feel
                    free to post it.

                    > rests entirely on the assumption that she is
                    attempting to confuse the reader

                    Yes, that is the case. Do you really disagree? Why
                    else go to the trouble of defining a term and then
                    explicitly _not_ use it?

                    if I carefully explain to you what a furlong is, and
                    then say ‘the racecourse is 4 miles long’, how long
                    would you think it is?

                    > a meaningful difference between a program that
                    acts systemically with known-in-advance deleterious
                    consequences for individuals and a program that
                    targets individuals directly for those consequences

                    No-one was ever jailed as a serial killer for not
                    buying enough mosquito nets. Pretty sure that is a
                    general societal consensus, and one I agree with. If
                    you disagree, you probably need a stronger argument
                    than simply stating the idea is laughable.

                    Similarly, ‘targeting minorities’ is different from
                    ‘shooting a specific minority’ which is different
                    from failing to spend enough to prevent a generic
                    unspecified person suffering some bad end.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:06 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466390>
                    ~new~

                    > If you want to spend your own money, here are
                    additional options it does not pay for but that we
                    can refer to you to a specialist to perform.

                    The same is of course the case in the UK; is that
                    something you thought was otherwise[1]? If so, I’m
                    having a theory-of-mind failure with respect to you;
                    how could you _possibly_ think that was true?

                    Admittedly, what they generally won’t do is allow
                    you to buy your own drugs off the internet and ask
                    them to put them into their IV drip machine.
                    Instead, you probably need to move hospitals to one
                    that supports the treatment, has done the training
                    and has it in stock. And if that hospital is
                    private, the beds and nurses and cleaning don’t come
                    for free.

                    If nothing else (i.e. the market won’t support
                    facilities for that treatment), air travel exists.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:25 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466401>
                    ~new~

                        if I carefully explain to you what a furlong is,
                        and then say ‘the racecourse is 4 miles long’,
                        how long would you think it is?

                    But that is not what happened here. “mile” and
                    “furlong” are two completely different terms. What
                    she did was equivalent to explaining what a
                    “nautical mile” is and then saying “so the Strait of
                    Dover is 18 miles wide”. Yes, it’s shorthand. It is
                    not the use of a completely different word.

                    I am well aware that the technical language allows
                    the possibility of the interpretation you supplied
                    when choosing to define her use of “per year” as
                    “per calendar year of treatment” instead of the “per
                    quality-adjusted life year” she had /just
                    mentioned/. I am accusing you of being deliberately
                    uncharitable, bordering on obtuse to reach that
                    interpretation by stripping it of the context of the
                    previous sentence.

                    I don’t think we’re going to agree on this point,
                    and without a transcript, it’s pointless to argue
                    the semantics any further.

                        The same is of course the case in the UK; is
                        that something you thought was otherwise?

                    No, I’m aware the UK has a parallel private
                    healthcare system that works almost completely
                    separately from the public one, but my understanding
                    (perhaps incorrect) is also that NHS doctors will
                    not usually suggest treatments that NHS cannot
                    provide, or if they do so, it’s more in the “psst,
                    hey, just so you know…” unofficial capacity. In the
                    US medical system, you will usually get a full range
                    of options from your medical provider because the
                    provider is not paying for it and has no reason to
                    disincentivize you from seeking whatever care is
                    available.

                    What I was addressing was what I thought (apparently
                    incorrectly) that you were implying: that in
                    America, if your insurance company doesn’t fully
                    cover the cost of a treatment, you’re simply out of
                    luck. The reality of the situation is far more
                    complex than that; many insurers will
                    partially-cover experimental treatments, or perhaps
                    not cover the treatment itself but cover many of the
                    related expenses such as the hospital stay.

                    Generally speaking, American HMOs such as Kaiser
                    Permanente are closer to the NHS model of having a
                    fixed menu of treatments that they will cover and
                    telling you “you’re on your own” if you need
                    something that they don’t provide. But even they
                    usually have some provision for reimbursement of
                    expenses incurred outside of their network, though
                    typically at a relatively low rate.

                    About a third of the insured individuals in the US
                    use this model; the rest typically use a PPO plan,
                    which offers a sliding scale of reimbursement based
                    on whether you choose to use in-network healthcare
                    providers for negotiated services or outside
                    healthcare providers. PPOs are typically much more
                    flexible about the types of treatments that can be
                    provided than HMOs; in most cases, as long as a
                    doctor recommends it, they will cover it. For
                    obvious reasons, most people with chronic medical
                    conditions tend to prefer the PPO model even though
                    the reimbursement rates tend to be lower.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    HeelBearCub says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 10:30 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466416>
                    ~new~

                    So, I really don’t have a dog in this fight, but
                    this testament is highly misleading:

                        If it costs too much per year- at the time, they
                        were leery of treatments that were above the
                        20,000 pound to 30,000 pound range

                    Now, maybe she simply is communicating poorly, but
                    absent a very close reading, that looks like she is
                    saying that any treatment more than $30K in a given
                    year is likely to be rejected.

                    Sure, it’s probably 30K per QALY, but that’s not how
                    the statement scans. She said have said, at the very
                    least, per year saved. Even better, per QALY saved.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Douglas Knight says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 10:57 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466422>
                    ~new~

                    HBC, where “a close reading” means reading the
                    preceding sentence?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:35 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466490>
                    ~new~

                        Now, maybe she simply is communicating poorly,
                        but absent a very close reading, that looks like
                        she is saying that any treatment more than $30K
                        in a given year is likely to be rejected.

                    You are leaving out the preceding bit which
                    explicitly referred to cost per QALY year. Only a
                    very careless, or deliberately hostile, reading
                    could miss that.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:38 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466492>
                    ~new~

                    Sure, if you take that sentence out of context and
                    don’t read the previous one, I agree, it absolutely
                    sounds like she’s making the claim that the system
                    caps at spending 30k pounds per year on a treatment,
                    because the common definition of “year” without a
                    qualifier will be “calendar year”.

                    But when she’s just said that they measure
                    treatments in QALYs in the previous sentence, the
                    word “year” should reasonably be interpreted to be
                    the “years” /she just said they measured/, not a
                    different definition of “year”.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 6:29 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466556>
                    ~new~

                    Do you want to do what Scott did on the NYT piece
                    where you have some trial readers read the article
                    and see how many come up with your interpretation?

                    The fact that you have a correct model of the
                    relationship between years and QALYs in your head
                    does not mean that the words as written imply that
                    model. ‘If you already know the right answer, you
                    can change the words as written so it doesn’t
                    contradict it’ is a pretty low bar for explanatory
                    writing.

                    What’s more, the fact that she was unable to
                    understand why experts were disagreeing with her
                    strongly suggests that Megan doesn’t have such a
                    model. Maybe she thought QALYs were a slightly
                    adjusted year, like a nautical mile, not something
                    well over an order of magnitude away from calendar
                    years.

                    Thinking about it, that’s a pretty good rule of
                    thumb when dealing with experts in general; if you
                    disagree with them, fine. If you _can’t understand
                    why they are disagreeing with you_, you probably
                    have a bot more study to do…

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    John Schilling says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 7:59 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466571>
                    ~new~

                        Do you want to do what Scott did on the NYT
                        piece where you have some trial readers read the
                        article and see how many come up with your
                        interpretation?

                    You’d want to find a test group consisting of policy
                    wonks for whom QALY isn’t MEGO terminology, of
                    course, as the point of comparison is a British
                    government health official chosen to publicly debate
                    health care policy with an economist.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    CatCube says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 9:41 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466610>
                    ~new~

                    As somebody who’s been reading McArdle for over 15
                    years at this point, I can assure you she’s well
                    aware of the definition of a Quality-Adjusted Life Year.

                    I may have actually learned about it reading her
                    columns, now that I think of it.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 3:02 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466845>
                    ~new~

                    There are two separate issues being conflated here.
                    One is what happened on the radio programme. We have
                    only McArdle’s report. I agree with those above who
                    have said probably the people she was talking to
                    weren’t as stupid as she makes them out, that this
                    was a misunderstanding, but we don’t know. Then
                    there is McArdle’s article. Is it misleading? We
                    might guess it reproduces whatever misunderstanding
                    happened on the radio programme, but it seems at
                    least as likely that, having thought through the
                    matter while writing it up, McArdle would not
                    reproduce the misunderstanding. 1soru1 is arguing
                    that there is an ambiguity in the article and that
                    perhaps the same ambiguity is why the panellists
                    disagreed with her. Everybody else does not agree
                    that it is a real ambiguity. A poll of readers of
                    Bloomberg could tell us whether most people would
                    find the sentence misleading, or we could poll
                    policy wonks as John Schilling suggests, but neither
                    would give us direct access to the first question.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
                  #
                    Edward Scizorhands says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 4:21 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466894>
                    ~new~

                        If the experts disagreed with what Megan claimed
                        to have said, what would they have claimed
                        instead as the truth of the situation? That NICE
                        doesn’t exist, that budgets are infinite?

                    That price doesn’t matter.

                    I know lots of people, who I talk to with my own
                    face in the real world, who think that the medical
                    system would work fine if it was “just doctors and
                    their patients” deciding what to do. And doctors
                    won’t recommend things that are “too expensive,” for
                    a bunch of reasons rolled into that last part.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466078>
              +
                Jiro says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 7:40 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466383>
                ~new~

                    The argument that there is a meaningful difference
                    between a program that acts systemically with
                    known-in-advance deleterious consequences for
                    individuals and a program that targets individuals
                    directly for those consequences is laughable, and
                    not something I suspect you would accept in any
                    other context. Or are you declaring your surrender,
                    for all time, of any and all arguments that policies
                    which eliminate welfare measures and subsidies are
                    “targeting the poor”? Or that racially-biased
                    policing policies “target minorities”?

                If the individual, or the group of individuals, are
                named in the intended rule, then the rule can be said to
                target them. If they aren’t, it isn’t. That’s like
                saying that knowing that my mother isn’t poor, giving a
                gift to my mother (and having some poor person die of
                malaria when I could have bought malaria nets) is
                targeting the poor.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466054>
              +
                DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 12:41 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466738>
                ~new~

                    What’s more, the fact that she was unable to
                    understand why experts were disagreeing with her
                    strongly suggests that Megan doesn’t have such a
                    model. Maybe she thought QALYs were a slightly
                    adjusted year, like a nautical mile, not something
                    well over an order of magnitude away from calendar
                    years.

                That makes no sense. If you read the quoted text, she
                was talking about the cost in money of a benefit in
                additional years of life, not a rate of expenditure.

                    Thinking about it, that’s a pretty good rule of
                    thumb when dealing with experts in general; if you
                    disagree with them, fine. If you _can’t understand
                    why they are disagreeing with you_, you probably
                    have a bot more study to do…

                Not a bad rule of thumb in lots of contexts. Just
                yesterday I was thinking of an obvious improvement that
                should be made in a product I was using–then looked at
                the product more carefully and discovered that they had
                already made a slightly better version of my proposed
                improvement.

                But in this case your explanation requires us to assume
                that the expert was himself so unfamiliar with the
                standard terminology in his field (QALY) that he
                interpreted someone else using it correctly as saying
                something entirely different.

                I think there are more plausible explanations.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466054>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 1:33 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466785>
                    ~new~

                    > interpreted someone else using it correctly as
                    saying something entirely different.

                    For her to use the term correctly, she would have
                    had to use it, no? In your model of what she is
                    saying she is using it; in her actual words she is not.

                    It seems pretty clear to me that McArdle either
                    mispoke, or was misinterpreted. For example, she
                    said ‘year’ meaning ‘QALY’, the experts heard ‘year’
                    meaning ‘year’. Or ‘treatment’ meaning ‘investing in
                    the infrastructure required to provide a kind of
                    treatment’ and the experts heard ‘treatment’. Maybe
                    she was just unlucky and ended up using a form of
                    words also used by those with a common misconception
                    about health care.

                    Note that, as a basic factual matter, the actual
                    limit for a drug-based cure of current patients, as
                    opposed to public health investment, is actually
                    along the lines of £200,000 to £300,000 per QALY.

                    https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/a01-p-b.pdf

                    /At the discounted price, the range of ICERs for
                    ivacaftor is £285,000 per QALY
                    (optimistic scenario) to £1.077M per QALY. The ICER
                    for the optimistic
                    scenario falls within the range observed by NICE for
                    other ultra-orphan
                    medicines. /

                    I’m not clear what your ‘more plausible
                    explanations’ are; they all had a stroke and forgot
                    everything they knew about health economics?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466738>
                  #
                    TerminusEst says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 2:25 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466817>
                    ~new~

                    @1soru1

                    Your quote from the NHS is missing an ellipsis. You
                    forgot to include this part:

                        This falls well outside the £20-30,000 per QALY
                        threshold typically used to determine
                        cost-effectiveness in the NHS.

                    The NHS appears to be making an exception for CF
                    based on its rarity:

                        Commissioners also noted that the NHS currently
                        funds a number of other ‘ultra-orphan medicines’
                        that have high opportunity cost and with
                        incremental cost effectiveness ratios likely to
                        fall in the same range as ivacaftor.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466738>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 3:06 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466847>
                    ~new~

                    And, having read that, you are still not getting the
                    fact that ‘target cost-effectiveness’ and ‘payment
                    limit’ are not the same?

                    The NHS is, in actual fact, paying £300,000 per QALY
                    for a single drug, which will be only part of a
                    patient’s treatment. And that’s not an exception;
                    the whole point of the paper is that it is no more
                    than what is already being paid for comparable drugs
                    (those that treat rare diseases well).

                    If you have a theory about how things work, you need
                    to adjust that theory to the facts, not vice-versa.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466738>
142.
    weareastrangemonkey says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 11:33 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465921>
    ~new~

    Tha analysis of Baumol’s cost disease is off. Cost disease can
    explain this without needing the wages of the
    teachers/doctors/sub-way workers to go up faster than wages in other
    sectors.

    Let’s consider a ridiculously simplified example of an economy with
    only barbers and bakers. A barber can effortlessly become a baker,
    and vice-a-versa. People don’t care which profession they are in
    except for the pay. People consume haircuts and bread.

    In the olden days it took one hour to cut someones hair and one hour
    to bake a loaf of bread. But then there is a technological
    revolution in baking and the baker can now bake 10 loaves of bread
    in an hour. Both before and after the baking revolution the baker
    and the barber have to be paid the same – otherwise people switch.
    Which means that, supposing they keep all their profits, a barber
    must now earn enough to buy 10 loaves of bread. The barber costs 10
    times as much for producing the same good as before, whereas the
    baker costs 10 times as much as before, but the baker produces 10
    times as much. This gives increasing cost of barbering without
    increasing relative wages.

    Now, if you also want barbering to end up being a larger share of
    spending we can get this as long as people don’t want to spend all
    their extra income on the bread. For simplicity, suppose at the old
    prices and incomes a third of people chose to be barbers and two
    thirds to be bakers bakers. Then after the baking revolution they
    use their new found wealth (at price of 1 haircut=10 loaves) to
    demand 5 times as much bread and merely double their demand for
    haircuts. Well that would actually double the number of barbers and
    halve the number of bakers – meaning that as a proportion of the
    economy barbering had moved from one third of the economy to two
    thirds. Of course, this would suggest that there was more of these
    things being consumed – but I think that is probably true of the
    industries that Scott discusses.

    So the fact that the wages of teachers, doctors and so forth have
    not been increasing at a faster rate than comparable professions is
    totally compatible with the Baumol cost disease explanation. Note,
    you can add a lot of complications in here but the basic result
    still goes through.

    Of course, none of this is to suggest that the other issues Scott
    raises are not also driving up costs or preventing efficiency
    increases – I think the direct evidence he provides is very
    compelling. But it is the case that you /could/ explain these cost
    increases via higher efficiency growth in other sectors without
    seeing an increase in the relatives wages of these sectors.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        alchemy29 says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 6:46 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466040>
        ~new~

        I think I’m failing to understand something. Why are costs not
        exploding in other sectors in which productivity has not
        improved? For instance bakers are no more efficient than they
        were 50 years ago, yet a loaf of bread doesn’t cost 10x as much
        as it used to adjusted for inflation.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465921>
          o
            Nornagest says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 6:48 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466043>
            ~new~

            I think you’re overestimating the number of people that get
            their bread from artisanal bakers. Most of it’s
            mass-produced and would capture efficiency gains; the stuff
            that isn’t is essentially a luxury good.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466040>
              +
                alchemy29 says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 10:06 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466108>
                ~new~

                Bread was a probably a poor example. Choose any industry
                that is not tech and produces something tangible – lets
                say haircutting. Productivity gains have been negligible
                but the costs have not exploded in the way that
                healthcare and education have.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466043>
          o
            Matt M says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 8:28 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466075>
            ~new~

            Productivity gains have taken place lower in the value chain
            though, right?

            If the process of harvesting grain is more efficient (which
            I assume it is) that would result in lower prices for bread,
            even if the baking process remains constant.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466040>
              +
                alchemy29 says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 10:12 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466111>
                ~new~

                How about haircuts? Very little increase in
                productivity, but little increase in cost.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466075>
                  #
                    weareastrangemonkey says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:49 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466192>
                    ~new~

                    Haircuts cost way more than they used to. The real
                    wage of a hairdresser in 1900 was a fraction of the
                    real wage of a hairdresser now – despite the fact
                    that they do essentially the same job. Note, this is
                    real wage not relative wage – relative wage should
                    stay the same (kind of) as jobs with comparable
                    requirements and pleasantness.

                    Now, we don’t have people worrying about the haircut
                    cost disease because it was never a big part of
                    expenditure in the first place. It would be good to
                    know if proportion of gdp spent on haircuts has gone
                    up or down – I suspect up, but that is not
                    necessarily implied by the theory.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466111>
                  #
                    alchemy29 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 10:23 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466210>
                    ~new~

                    I said 50 years ago not 1900’s. Haircuts do not cost
                    much more per BLS data. This is same period in which
                    healthcare and education costs skyrocketed.

                    https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2014/article/one-hundred-years-of-price-change-the-consumer-price-index-and-the-american-inflation-experience-10.htm
                    https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/cpicalc.pl?cost1=1.42&year1=1955&year2=2016

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466111>
143.
    againstbrutalism says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 11:34 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465922>
    ~new~

    Where could all the money be going?
    It’s so mysterious! What a mystery.
    http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-MBqvW8N-sOE/TbPWVbgSIdI/AAAAAAAABtU/OPwd6UBT-Ck/s1600/ceo-ratio.png
    http://www.motherjones.com/files/images/blog_executive_comp_wapo_0.jpg
    I guess we’ll never know. It’s just so puzzling.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Glen Raphael says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 12:32 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465937>
        ~new~

        You’re being silly.

        Suppose we made a similar chart looking at top entertainers –
        people like Colbert and Springsteen – and looked at that group’s
        salaries as a multiple what the average singer or actor makes.
        We’d see the exact same trend for the exact same reason. Colbert
        is playing to a vast broadcast audience and Springsteen is
        selling out stadium shows; in the 1980s the infrastructure
        wasn’t there to let top performers be as productive as they are
        today so they couldn’t get paid as much. Similarly, the heads of
        huge companies like Apple or Walmart are running vastly larger
        and more complex companies than they would have been 30 years
        ago. The top few hundred superstars in /any/ industry get paid
        more today than in the past in large part because they are
        /creating more value/ via work that is more highly leveraged
        than before.

        (And as I mentioned above: the median CEO salary is $170k
        <http://www.payscale.com/research/US/Job=Chief_Executive_Officer_(CEO)/Salary>.)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465922>
      *
        AnonEEmous says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 12:44 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465940>
        ~new~

        yeah, public school CEOs really get overpaid. Thanks, Obama!

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465922>
          o
            BBA says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:58 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466012>
            ~new~

            The chancellor of the NYC public schools, Carmen Fariña,
            makes about $400,000 a year – high for a civil servant but
            not much for a CEO of a “business” with over 100,000
            employees. (And almost half of that figure is her pension –
            she had retired in 2006 after a 40-year career in the city
            schools and stayed retired until she was appointed
            chancellor in 2014.)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465940>
      *
        John Schilling says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 12:48 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465942>
        ~new~

            in the 1980s the infrastructure wasn’t there to let top
            performers be as productive as they are today so they
            couldn’t get paid as much.

        In the 1980s, infrastructure pretty much guaranteed the top
        performers 1/3 of the prime-time television audience, and the
        prime-time television audience consisted of almost literally
        everyone who didn’t have the energy and opportunity for some
        more active pursuit after a day’s work plus dinner, etc. Today,
        the prime-time television audience is diluted by the internet,
        and divided among a dozen or so high-profile channels.

        Likewise, in 1980 we had the infrastructure to deliver first-run
        movies in theaters to essentially the entire population, and
        that population had little alternative if they were in the mood
        for new long-form audiovisual entertainment.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465922>
          o
            Cypren says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 5:02 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466014>
            ~new~

            That’s true, but keep in mind that in the modern era, the
            market for American culture is now global rather than
            national. The downsides of competition for attention have
            been more than made up for by the increase in potential
            customer base and the rapidly rising wealth outside of the
            traditional Western first-world nations. Disney, just to
            pick an example, is doing better than it ever has because of
            its massive success in building a truly global brand.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465942>
              +
                John Schilling says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 8:02 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466063>
                ~new~

                Good point. Hmm, that suggests there should be a
                significant difference in the revenue trends over the
                past few decades for entertainment that doesn’t
                translate as well to the global market. American-rules
                football, black comedians, country-western music, etc.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466014>
          o
            Synonym Seven says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 8:59 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466083>
            ~new~

                Likewise, in 1980 we had the infrastructure to deliver
                first-run movies in theaters to essentially the entire
                population, and that population had little alternative
                if they were in the mood for new long-form audiovisual
                entertainment.

            Not quite true – it wasn’t until a bit later on in the 80s
            that duplication technology made it viable to saturate
            theatres with a single particular movie, and reduced
            competition due to the Reagan deregulation (specifically,
            letting studios also own theatres) gobbled up the small
            players in the market.

            In 1980, theatres as a whole were far less homogenous than
            they are today. You might be able to see Empire Strikes Back
            in any city in America, but there’d also be dozens of other
            theatres (hundreds in the major cities) showing everything
            from old classics to the current revivals (back in the day,
            a movie might be re-released in theatres every five or ten
            years or so – Disney was especially well-known for this) to
            foreign/speciality films to the unabashed big-movie ripoffs
            for theatres that couldn’t acquire a print of the
            blockbuster of the moment to barely-remembered movies that
            some theatre-owner thought would turn a profit.

            The TV landscape was definitely more homogenous. Movies, not
            so much – at least not for the first half of the 80s.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465942>
              +
                Cypren says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 9:25 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466096>
                ~new~

                    …(back in the day, a movie might be re-released in
                    theatres every five or ten years or so – Disney was
                    especially well-known for this)…

                Man, that stirred memories I haven’t thought of in
                decades: seeing /Snow White/ in a theater. That must
                have been sometime in the 1980s, but I couldn’t tell you
                when. Ah, nostalgia.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466083>
      *
        Le Maistre Chat says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 12:49 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465943>
        ~new~

        That”s probably less than a percent of the story.
        Note that schools don”t even have CEOs and that sector is a huge
        part of cost disease.
        See, this is the problem with the scapegoat mechanism. What if
        you sacrifice the scapegoat and the problem doesn’t disappear?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465922>
      *
        CatCube says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 12:59 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465950>
        ~new~

        1) Cute bullshit like having your chart run off the axis should
        instantly make you distrust the source; they’re pushing an
        agenda, not trying to display data for analysis.

        2) The ratio has increased, and there’s a fairness argument to
        be made there, but that’s entirely about the emotional response
        of the employees. It has zero bearing on their physical
        well-being. For example (numbers from a quick Google search) the
        salary of Walmart’s CEO is $35 million/year, with 2.3 million
        employees worldwide. If you cut his salary to zero, that
        represents an additional $15/year per employee.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465922>
144.
    MathEpic says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 12:10 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465932>
    ~new~

    You could make the case that product safety testing is a natural
    monopoly, and a public good.

    Consider, there is little benefit of two companies running the same
    quality tests/checks on the same design/process. Furthermore, very
    few end customers have the required time, experience, money, or
    incentive to go through multiple quality check agencies to determine
    which of them are “trustworthy”. It would be very easy for
    ShoddyHelmets ltd to establish the shell company
    TheseHelmetsAreTottalySafeTrustMeOnThis Co to give them solid
    reviews. Yes, a lot of people would catch on, but by the time that
    has happened lots of bad helmets have been sold to the people that
    have not caught on.

    Add that to the fact that it is a lot easier to punish the makers of
    dangerously fraudulent products if the testing agency has the force
    of the law behind them and you can start to see why government
    safety checking is more widely used then private.

    I will be the first to point out that the FDA and other protection
    agencies are not perfect. I just want make sure we all understand
    the cost of doing things the alternate way before we switch over.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        CatCube says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 1:04 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465953>
        ~new~

        I don’t think that government safety checking actually happens
        all that often. Usually building codes will require
        certification from a private testing firm; Underwriter’s
        Laboratories is common for fire doors, for example.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465932>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 6:41 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466038>
            ~new~

            I do not see how this comment is relevant to MathEpic’s
            analysis? Governments may well outsource certain parts of a
            safety checking programme to specific companies, but this
            would still be a process of government requiring safety
            checks in order to respond to the potential market failures
            MathEpic identifies. In any case, the amount of safety
            checking done by “government”, by which you seem to mean by
            a directly-paid government employee and not a contractor,
            depends on the government and the kind of safety check in
            question.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465953>
              +
                MathEpic says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 7:03 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466049>
                ~new~

                Actually, I think may agree with CatCube’s argument.

                If I understand correctly, he is making the point that
                actual safety checks are not a significant cost in the
                grand scheme of things.

                I will concede that point, and in my previous comment I
                mentioned the savings of those redundant checks as a
                benefit of having a government monopoly. I realize now
                that this aspect of my model is flawed.

                I will however stand by my assertion that having
                multiple standard setting bodies would be confusing to
                the average customer, and ultimately detrimental to the
                safety of the consumer. The parts of my argument that I
                think are important are unchallenged.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466038>
                  #
                    CatCube says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 7:40 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466056>
                    ~new~

                    No, I actually think that the safety checks can be a
                    major cost driver–because they actually can be
                    really expensive. What I was quibbling with was
                    merely that you couldn’t have private companies set
                    safety standards, since the vast majority of safety
                    standards /are/ set by private industry–the name
                    “Underwriter’s Laboratory” came from the fact that
                    insurance underwriters founded a laboratory to test
                    consumer appliances for fire safety. The government
                    often tries to use already-existing standards
                    instead of writing our own.

                    Most building codes, for example, are written by
                    industry and enacted into law.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466049>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 7:44 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466057>
                    ~new~

                    I agree.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466049>
145.
    wanderinglogic says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 12:19 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465935>
    ~new~

    I think the k-12 education cost disease is easily explained in a way
    that higher-ed and health care are not.

    First: The k-12 price increase is “only” 2.5x over 40 years, while
    higher ed increased ~10x, and health care costs grew 5x (according
    to the numbers in the article).

    Second: while test scores of /students in school/ have not improved,
    the fraction of the workforce that finishes a high school degree has
    measurably improved: The fraction of the population aged 25+ with a
    high-school diploma went from 50% in 1967, to 75% in 1986, and 88%
    in 2015.
    <http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/demo/p20-578.pdf>
    That’s a large reason for productivity growth in the U.S. during
    that time period: workers who can proficiently read English, and do
    arithmetic, and even a little bit of algebra are more productive
    than those who can’t.

    Here’s the thing: we should expect marginal costs of graduating each
    additional student (without dropping test scores) to increase. And
    the marginal cost of each additional student /has/ increased. This
    first 50% of students are “easy” to educate: they are raised by
    relatively well-educated, employed, and motivated parents, are
    native English speakers, are not malnourished, and have no language,
    learning, emotional, social, or mobility deficits. But now we’re
    graduating students who enter the school system unable to speak
    English, student’s with learning disabilities, student’s who need
    the help of social workers or psychiatric workers to reach graduation.

    And @massivefocusedinaction’s post above includes a graph
    <http://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/~/media/images/reports/2012/10/bg2739/chart1750.jpg>
    that agrees with the idea that the marginal cost of education each
    additional student is a large part of the cost growth. In that
    graph, “non-teaching staff” has grown 138% over the period when
    drop-out rates were falling from 50% to 12%. This staff is largely
    specialist social workers, psychiatrists, learning and language
    disability specialists, along with aids for students with the most
    severe physical challenges. Teaching staff has also grown by 60%,
    and that may be because class sizes need to be smaller to achieve
    reasonable outcomes when a small fraction of the students need a lot
    of extra help.

    From a legal perspective, the United States has codified into law
    that everyone has a right to a k-12 education, no matter the
    marginal cost of providing that education. Brown v Board of
    Education, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rehabilitation_Act_of_1973>, the
    Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individuals_with_Disabilities_Education_Act>
    of 1990, and the No Child Left Behind Act
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Child_Left_Behind_Act> of 2001
    (among many others) have all contributed.

    K-12 education costs have increased because there has been a
    political decision in the United States to use tax dollars to
    educate students with higher marginal costs.

    ETA: looks like @fc123 made a similar comment about marginal costs
    while I was composing my comment.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Wrong Species says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 1:50 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465963>
        ~new~

            That’s a large reason for productivity growth in the U.S.
            during that time period: workers who can proficiently read
            English, and do arithmetic, and even a little bit of algebra
            are more productive than those who can’t.

        Do you honestly believe that students go in to high school not
        knowing how to do arithmetic yet come out with a good
        understanding? If you can’t proficiently read English after
        eight years, I don’t think the extra four are going to help. The
        reason we have more kids graduating is because they dumbed down
        high school.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465935>
          o
            wanderinglogic says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 4:18 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466001>
            ~new~

            I’m just agreeing with Scott’s data: Average test scores
            have neither increased nor decreased for students who are in
            school, yet the fraction of students who are in, and who
            finish school has increased. That interpretation is also
            consistent with wage data: The wage premium for a high
            school diploma has held pretty steady for the last 40 years
            <https://trends.collegeboard.org/education-pays/figures-tables/median-earnings-gender-and-education-level-1971-2008>.

                The reason we have more kids graduating is because they
                dumbed down high school.

            Okay, if you say so. Show me the data.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-465963>
              +
                AnonEEmous says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 4:28 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466003>
                ~new~

                i’d look instead at policies of purposely advancing
                children instead of holding them back

                i don’t know if data can predict this, but maybe a good
                measure would be children held back correlated with
                standardized test scores and how that has changed going
                forward. I.E. using standardized test scores as a marker
                of learning, and then using that to see if lack of
                learning causes children to be held back as much. Ya dig?

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466001>
              +
                Matt M says:	
                February 11, 2017 at 5:39 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466021>
                ~new~

                    Okay, if you say so. Show me the data.

                Well, you don’t have any data either.

                Telling us graduation rates increased is not valuable
                unless we have some sort of way to know that graduation
                standards have been held constant.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466001>
                  #
                    wanderinglogic says:	
                    February 11, 2017 at 6:57 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466046>
                    ~new~

                    Scott ended his post with

                        What’s happening? I don’t know and I find it
                        really scary.

                    I was trying to help Scott explain /Scott’s/ data
                    that test scores have neither increased or
                    decreased, but that costs have increased 2.5x. I
                    gave a plausible explanation for that: government
                    policy demanded that we increase high school
                    diplomas significantly. We have data on exactly
                    /why/ the costs have gone up 2.5x: because we had to
                    hire a bunch of specialists to deal with the
                    students that are harder to educate as shown in
                    @massivefocusedinaction’s graph
                    <http://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/~/media/images/reports/2012/10/bg2739/chart1750.jpg>.

                    In addition to Scott’s data showing test scores have
                    not gone down, I also gave a link to data showing
                    that private industry gives approximately the same
                    real-dollar value to a high school diploma that they
                    gave 40 years ago. Here it is again:
                    https://trends.collegeboard.org/education-pays/figures-tables/median-earnings-gender-and-education-level-1971-2008.

                    I’ve proposed a model that does not disagree with
                    the data we have (some of which was provided by
                    Scott, some by @massivefocusedinaction, some by me,
                    none by you.) My model is based on neo-classical
                    Econ 101 supply and demand theory. (The federal
                    government said that they wanted a high school
                    education made available to a much larger fraction
                    of students: that shifts the demand curve, thus the
                    price must rise.) There’s no need to make the model
                    more complicated to explain the data we have, so I
                    left the quality reduction out of my model.

                    I understand that you dislike public educators, and
                    public education, and would like me to help you say
                    that they are bad, bad people who are purposely
                    undermining the american way of life, or whatever.
                    That’s fine, but it wasn’t the question Scott
                    actually asked, so it’s not the one I answered. If
                    you want to argue that public educators are bad,
                    horrible people, please do, but I’m not going to do
                    your homework for you.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466021>
              +
                Wrong Species says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 12:40 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466134>
                ~new~

                Federal Researchers Find Lower Standards in Schools
                <https://nytimes.com/2009/10/30/education/30educ.html>

                An anecdote but illustrative of a wider trend. It’s both
                hilarious and depressing:

                California school district lowers the bar for an ‘F’ to
                20 percent <http://www.thecollegefix.com/post/24840/>

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466001>
                  #
                    wanderinglogic says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:10 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466193>
                    ~new~

                    Are you sure you want to use that first link to the
                    NYT as your “evidence”? It is an article about
                    changes in standards between 2005 and 2007 under No
                    Child Left Behind. It points to the National
                    Assessment of Educational Progress
                    <https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/ltt_2012/>, which
                    I think might be where the number’s in Scott’s first
                    graph came from. The summary from that report is:

                        Compared to the first assessment in 1971 for
                        reading and in 1973 for mathematics, scores were
                        higher in 2012 for 9- and 13-year-olds and not
                        significantly different for 17-year-olds.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466134>
                  #
                    Wrong Species says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 10:53 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466215>
                    ~new~

                    The fact that a few kids might have been able to
                    push the average up doesn’t mean they haven’t dumbed
                    down schools. It’s easily possible that they could
                    have focused their efforts on bringing the lowest
                    kids up a little bit while neglecting standards for
                    everyone else. And higher test scores mean nothing
                    if they simply forget everything they learned. I
                    gave you evidence of lowered standards. Do you have
                    any evidence that high school actually makes
                    students more productive? Because the disparity
                    between drop outs and graduates can also be
                    explained by signaling.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466134>
                  #
                    wanderinglogic says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 6:16 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466356>
                    ~new~

                    Your NYT article talks about changes in standards
                    between 2005 and 2007 in response to No Child Left
                    Behind (which started in 2002). Among the anecdotal
                    data in the article is the statement:

                        Eight states /*increased*/ the rigor of their
                        standards in one or both subjects and grades.

                    Meanwhile Scott, @massivefocusedinaction, and I have
                    been trying to answer an unrelated question and have
                    provided time series data of measurements from the
                    ~40 year period from 1970 to 2010. Scott’s data from
                    the National Assessment of Educational Progress
                    <https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/ltt_2012/>)
                    suggests the quality of education for 17 year olds
                    in school has stayed about the same over that 40
                    year period. Scott is worried about the /2.5x cost
                    increase/ over that 40 year period. Most of the cost
                    increase happened in the 35 years before your 2007
                    article. Most of the increase in graduation rate
                    also happened in the 35 years before your 2007 article.

                    As I explained to @MattM: I offered a model to
                    explain the data that Scott is worried about.

                        The model is based on neo-classical Econ 101
                        supply and demand theory. (The federal
                        government said that they wanted a high school
                        education made available to a much larger
                        fraction of students: that shifts the demand
                        curve, thus the price must rise.) There’s no
                        need to make the model more complicated to
                        explain the data we have, so I left the quality
                        reduction out of my model.

                    Here’s the data we have:

                    a. Brown v. Board of Education, the Rehabilitation
                    Act of 1973
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rehabilitation_Act_of_1973>,
                    the Individuals with Disabilites Education Act of
                    1990
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individuals_with_Disabilities_Education_Act>,
                    and the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001
                    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Child_Left_Behind_Act>,
                    all dictated that the states deliver k-12 education
                    to a much wider group of students, without taking
                    into account that those students would be /much/
                    more expensive to educate because they have
                    cultural, language, learning, social, emotional, or
                    physical challenges that interfere with their learning.

                    b. @massivefocusedinaction’s post gave a graph
                    <http://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/~/media/images/reports/2012/10/bg2739/chart1750.jpg>
                    that showed that the number of teachers during the
                    40 year period had nearly doubled, while the number
                    of specialist social workers, psychologists, special
                    education specialists, etc went up by a factor of
                    2.4x during that 40 year period. Scott had already
                    provided data showing that individual teacher
                    salaries haven’t gone up
                    <https://fiftyfivemillion.wordpress.com/2013/11/28/teacher-salaries-rose-in-the-80s-and-theyve-been-slipping-since/>,
                    but @massivefocusedinaction’s data explains that the
                    entire cost increase is due to hiring more staff
                    (and in particular: specialist non-teaching staff).
                    Yet there aren’t significantly more school aged
                    children, so the arithmetic says that the cost per
                    pupil has gone up. So the question now is: why did
                    all those people get hired?

                    c. While there aren’t significantly more school aged
                    children, way more of those children are staying in
                    school. And the additional students that are staying
                    in school are harder to educate, thus require
                    expensive specialists. The data that the students
                    are staying in school longer can be found in
                    graduation rates over the 40 year period 1970 to
                    2010:
                    http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/demo/p20-578.pdf.

                    You, and several other commenters, have a deep
                    emotional or religious attachment to asserting that
                    the quality of public education decreased over the
                    period 1970 to 2010. That wasn’t what Scott’s post
                    was about, and it wasn’t what my reply was about. I
                    said there were a lot more people getting diplomas.
                    Saying that those diplomas are of lower quality is
                    fine, but it makes Scott’s question /harder/ to
                    explain, not easier.

                    If we want to say that the quality of high school
                    diplomas have decreased we need to explain the
                    following:

                    Labor productivity in the United States increased
                    somewhat during the period 1970 to 2010, by about 1%
                    a year (http://www.nber.org/papers/w15834.pdf, look
                    at Table 4 on page 40, labor productivity is the
                    column labeled “MFP” (multi-factor productivity)).
                    That’s consistent with having a workforce that is
                    better educated. Labor productivity increasing
                    doesn’t prove much of anything about changes in
                    quality of high school diplomas, but we need to
                    provide a mechanism to explain how the work force is
                    increasing its productivity despite the fact that
                    high school diplomas are becoming lower quality. I
                    don’t know of such a mechanism.

                    We don’t have any direct measurements of diploma
                    requirements (if I knew what such a measurement was
                    called I’d have already provided a link to a time
                    series from 1970 to 2010, but I don’t so I haven’t.
                    I’ve been asking you to provide one, and you haven’t
                    either.) What we do have is the National Assessment
                    of Educational Progress
                    <https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/ltt_2012/> which
                    shows that /despite the fact that a *far* larger
                    fraction of 17 year-olds are being assessed/
                    (because a larger fraction of 17 year olds are
                    staying in school than in 1970), the average score
                    hasn’t changed much over 40 years. That’s Scott’s
                    original data. You’ve argued that maybe the average
                    has stayed the same but the variance has increased.
                    That’s a fine argument, but we don’t have the data
                    about the variance, and /you are arguing that a
                    significant number of 17 year-olds are getting a
                    *better* education than they did in 1970/. That
                    seems … unlikely.

                    Finally, the wage premium for a high-school diploma
                    has stayed constant at about $7000 (2008 dollars)
                    from 1971 to 2008
                    <https://trends.collegeboard.org/education-pays/figures-tables/median-earnings-gender-and-education-level-1971-2008>.
                    If the quality of high-school diplomas has dropped
                    we need to explain why free-market employers are
                    still willing to pay $7000/year more to high-school
                    grads than to high-school drop outs despite the fact
                    that the supply of high-school grads is /much/
                    larger (compared to high-school dropouts) than it
                    was in 1970. I don’t know how to explain that either.

                    So: I am very, very, very sorry that I can not help
                    you in your religious/emotional quest to prove that
                    public educators are monsters dedicated to
                    destruction of all that is Christian and good in the
                    United States. I’ve done my best, and failed. Good
                    luck in your quest.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466134>
                  #
                    Wrong Species says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 7:02 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466367>
                    ~new~

                        I don’t know of such a mechanism.

                    There are a million reasons why productivity can
                    increase or decrease. The quality of high school
                    education probably has little to do with it. And if
                    you read Robert Gordon, you would know that
                    productivity has gone down over the last 40 years,
                    which doesn’t help your case. I don’t really have as
                    strong of an opinion on high schools being dumbed
                    down as you think I do. My big problem was with you
                    claiming the link between high school graduation
                    rates and productivity, which I believe is just
                    ridiculous. You completely ignored my point about
                    signaling, which I believe is why there is a
                    disparity between graduates and non-graduates and
                    you still haven’t given any evidence linking high
                    school graduation rates or test scores to
                    productivity. Don’t think that just because I’m
                    biased that you aren’t too.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466134>
                  #
                    wanderinglogic says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 9:15 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466596>
                    ~new~

                    One correction: Robert Gordon. He says the growth
                    /rate/ has slowed, not that productivity declined.
                    He says that in the paper I pointed to in my last
                    reply, and in more recent papers like this one:
                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w19895.

                        The United States achieved a 2.0 percent average
                        annual growth rate of real GDP per capita
                        between 1891 and 2007. This paper predicts that
                        growth in the 25 to 40 years after 2007 will be
                        much slower … *Educational attainment, a central
                        driver of growth over the past century,*
                        stagnates at a plateau as the U.S. sinks lower
                        in the world league tables of high school and
                        college completion rates.

                    “Stagnates at a plateau” some time after 2007 is
                    most definitely /not/ “declines between 1970 and 2010.”

                    Yes, I know I’m biased. I was quite proud of myself
                    for posting a “libertarian” analysis, blaming
                    government intervention for a problem that my
                    bleeding liberal heart would otherwise love to throw
                    more tax dollars at.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466134>
146.
    BenB says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 1:02 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465951>
    ~new~

    I’d like to propose an explanation for cost disease, and why it is
    specifically an American problem. In every example @Scott cites, and
    one I’ll add below, a consumer chooses “the best” option from range
    of options. I think an American obsession with “winning” — or
    really, with “not losing” — may lead us to devalue second-best
    options. “Second-best” suppliers, facing low sales, must often
    choose to either compete for the top slot in their market, or the
    bottom, often excluding the middle entirely.

    Consider, for instance, Google’s line of Nexus phones. In 2012,
    Google released the well-reviewed Nexus 4. They priced it at $350.
    This was very much a “middle of the line” cost, between typical
    values of $200 and $600. Sales, however, disappointed. In 2013,
    Google released the Nexus 5. It was again well-reviewed, similarly
    priced, and had similarly disappointing sales. In 2015, Google
    released the Nexus 5x. While priced again at $350, reviewers noted
    it was of slightly lesser quality…and sales again disappointed. In
    2016, Google abandoned their line of Nexus phones, in favor of the
    “Pixel” models. These models are priced at the top end of the
    market: upwards of $600. Faced with low demand, the supplier exited
    the mid-tier market. In fact, the most (only?) popular mid-tier
    phone today is the hard-to-find OnePlus 3T, made by a non-American
    company with no American retail presence.

    The key point here is that this whole outcome is, economically
    speaking, really dopey. These $400 phones – and even $200 phones –
    are really, really good. Naturally, they’re not quite as good as the
    $600 phones. But many folks would be much happier with the cheaper
    phones and extra cash. At the very least, enough folks ought to be
    happier to support some domestic market for these models.

    I think we see this pattern across industries. I’ve *never* heard a
    friend say, “I /could/ afford this more expensive education for
    myself or my children, but I’m going to go with the second-best
    option, because I’d prefer the savings.” Ditto for medical care, or
    buying a home, or renting one. Scott’s examples seem consistent with
    this. He himself declined a cheaper college education (and now seems
    to regret that choice); he describes a patient accepting an
    unnecessary psychiatric evaluation; he links to pet owner who can’t
    imagine their dog would be happy with a few pulled teeth, and a city
    government building unnecessarily spacious transit stations. In each
    case, the consumer failed to really consider the /benefits/ of the
    second-best choice in each market, relative to the best; the
    consumer evaluated only those costs.

    Other countries don’t have this problem, at least not in the same
    way. For instance, a good friend of mine was recently diagnosed with
    an uncomfortable, though not life threatening, condition. Without
    insurance, the sticker price for the treatment is around $50k/yr. As
    it happens, my friend is a national of a Western European country.
    They explored returning home regularly and receiving the treatment
    there through their national health system…and were shocked to
    discover that their European government health plan didn’t cover
    this treatment at all, and their private American health insurance
    covered it in full. The European government was perfectly happy to
    pay for “second-best” care and pocket the savings; the American
    insurance company paid for it all, and socialized the costs.

    It’s hard to pinpoint why Americans shy away from second-best
    options. But I’m inclined to credit our national fear of losing.
    Consider the Atlanta Falcons, for instance. Nobody thinks of them as
    the second-best football team in the country. The Vice President
    doesn’t host them at the Naval Observatory. In a sense, they’re not
    even the “losers” of Superbowl LI…they’re just nothing. I wonder if
    Americans tend to apply this mentality to more arenas than sports;
    if our anxieties about not having “the best” push us to spend far
    more than we really want to.

    Small wonder, then, that organizations across the economy find ways
    to spend /more/ money, when we the consumers won’t spend less even
    if they try. I’m not sure how we could break this cycle, when
    there’s so little market for mid-price options across so many
    industries. But if we’re going to start anywhere, I suspect it will
    have to be in our own homes: by turning down the priciest options
    ourselves when we can, in favor of pretty-good ones.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        psmith says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 8:16 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466068>
        ~new~

            Ditto for medical care, *or buying a home, or renting one*.

        As an American, this surprises me. I did this with my apartments
        ever since I moved out of my parents’ house, and most of the
        people I know have done it as well.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465951>
      *
        CecilTheLion says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 1:33 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466148>
        ~new~

        aka. the gross substitution axiom is incorrect, there really is
        no spill over. This also vindicates the idea that unemployment
        can be involuntary (how people could possibly believe otherwise
        is beyond me).

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465951>
147.
    MathEpic says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 2:12 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465966>
    ~new~

    Here is a theory/line of reasoning that /may/ explain these
    observations:

    What if the problem stems from a defect in the way our culture
    approaches progress? Namely we are always trying to improve what we
    have, but we have a hard time walking back upgrades that cost more
    then they are worth.

    I have only personal and anecdotal evidence, but hear me out:

    Suppose you are in charge of police equipment.
    Scenario 1:You have the chance to upgrade their radios to a more
    expensive model that have twice the range.
    Scenario 2:You have the chance to replace the radios they have now
    with a model costing 75% of the current models, but have a shorter
    range.

    YMMV, but as someone steeped in American culture I feel like
    scenario 2 would be a much harder sell unless the police department
    was under some serious pressure to reduce costs.

    I suspect that what subway construction, education, and medical
    markets have in common is that they are all more susceptible to this
    “quality accretion” then other markets.

    The real kicker is that I think these industries are susceptible to
    this effect in different ways.
    Elementary Education and Insured Medicine have third party payment
    systems that disincentivize economizing.
    Higher Education and Medicine are both industries where the quality
    of the primary product (marketable skills/not dying) is difficult to
    measure so they improve the quality of secondary products (luxurious
    living space, etc.) in order to signal “we can be trusted”.
    Police and Military are industries where lack of equipment can end
    up killing someone, so any attempt to roll back equipment is
    portrayed as a betrayal.
    Police and Medicine both lack clear upper caps on what constitutes
    “getting the job done.” (At least until we live in a world where no
    crime happens and nobody is sick or hurt.)

    If this is really a cultural problem then no public policy can fix
    it directly. In the end people will need to change how they think,
    and be willing to accept something less then the “best” for economic
    reasons. And that is a very hard sell.

    Would /you/ be willing to tell a parent that medicine A has a 99.9%
    chance of success, medicine B has a 95% chance of success, but you
    should take medicine B because it costs less?

    I don’t have a recommendation, except a partial solution in higher
    education.
    Why not allow student loans to take the following form: If borrow $X
    to get a Y degree at Z university then you owe the bank, say, 137%
    of your annual income whatever that may be. (no interest. You pay
    10% of your income for 13.7 years and then you are done) The formula
    for the final percentage owed should be transparent etc.
    Someone getting a degree that allowed a high paying job could get a
    loan with a low percentage compared to someone with a degree that is
    not marketable, an economical collage may have a better rate then an
    expensive one. A collage with good job placement may get a better
    rate then a collage that doesn’t care if students are unemployed for
    two years after graduating. etc.

    My hope is that if we can communicate “This is how much the degree
    is going to cost you” in a way that factors in prestige and the
    value of a degree to prospective collage students we can help some
    of them choose a more economical option. This will in turn
    incentivize higher education to cut costs in ways that don’t hurt
    the marketability of their graduates.

    Thoughts?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
148.
    The Obsolete Man says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 2:54 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465979>
    ~new~

    This is an awesome post. I think the three things you mention above
    that make the most intuitive sense to me are:

    >This kind of suggests a picture where colleges expect people will
    pay whatever price they set, so they set a very high price and then
    use the money for cool things and increasing their own prestige.

    >…might we have changed our level of risk tolerance?

    >…might things cost more for the people who pay because so many
    people don’t pay?

    What about demographic changes that increase risk aversion? We
    shifted from dependents being young and in school to dependents on
    social security. IOW, who are the people who were not in the work
    force 80 years ago (i.e.) vs. who are not in the work force now?
    Here’s a link that shows the transition:
    http://www.calculatedriskblog.com/2015/08/us-population-distribution-by-age-1900.html

    Perhaps a greatly increased population of older more risk averse
    folks tilts the scales enough to make a big difference? For
    education, I think it’s primarily “signaling inflation’. The ease
    with which you can finance something and spread it out over a long
    time period aggravates this (like student loans). We are the insured
    society. I tried to find some statistics for how much we spend for
    insurance in a general sense but couldn’t find it. But, I bet it’s
    gone up a lot. Not just health insurance.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        CecilTheLion says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 1:20 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466145>
        ~new~

        Maybe it was an issue of anchoring, creating a social-want, and
        then slowly increasing prices as demand became more inelastic?
        Maybe it was just brilliant; capital has essentially and quietly
        placed the burden and cost of training on consumers, which makes
        me sadface.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465979>
149.
    Le Maistre Chat says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 3:02 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-465982>
    ~new~

    Oh my gosh, there are a lot of confounding factors here.
    First of, how much is cost disease America’s peculiar institution
    and how much of it has happened across the developed world? Surely
    we could learn from the nations where it’s absent, or happens least
    if none such exist. (OTOH, if it’s only absent in particularly alien
    cultures like Japan, our ability to change is likely to be limited,
    and if more homogeneous cultures have the big advantage, we need to
    double down on assimilation, and that assumes HBD is pseudo-science.)
    Is women’s workforce participation a causal factor? The increases
    are correlated, but that doesn’t necessarily mean anything,
    especially if it’s an American disease.
    We’ve become considerably wealthier in terms of /stuff/ even as
    family income has stagnated or worse since 1973. What’s influenced
    by cost disease is skilled labor (teaching, doctors, subway
    construction), without that going to the skilled workers. So let’s
    figure out where that money is disappearing to.

    My conservative intuition is that a lot of this is going to
    women-dominated fields that have ballooned in importance for legal
    reasons (psychology, compliance with PC codes that didn’t exist in
    1971, etc.) and family income is stagnant because these women are in
    the two-income trap, but who knows?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Le Maistre Chat says:	
        February 11, 2017 at 4:57 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466011>
        ~new~

        I also wanted to comment on the famous “increasing inequality
        since 1973” factor, but didn’t have data handy.

        “The best survey data show that the top 3 percent … hold over
        half of all wealth. Other research suggests that most of that is
        held by an even smaller percentage…”
        <http://www.cbpp.org/research/poverty-and-inequality/a-guide-to-statistics-on-historical-trends-in-income-inequality>

        Can anyone direct us to good sociological data on this class?

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-465982>
          o
            cassander says:	
            February 11, 2017 at 10:45 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466120>
            ~new~

            If you’re trying to measure inequality, wealth is a terrible
            way to look at it because of how affected by age it is. In a
            perfectly equal society where everyone makes the same amount
            of money, saves the same amount, and gets the same raise
            every year, the richest 1/5 will end up with 66% of the
            wealth just because of cohort effects and compound interest.
            Income is better, and consumption is better still.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466011>
150.
    Anonymous says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 5:26 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466017>
    ~new~

    Comparison with other countries got me thinking about “high standard
    of living”. What exactly does a middle-class Spaniard not get that a
    middle-class American does?

    After you provide first world class stuff like indoor plumbing and
    drinking water, abundance of food, 24/7 electricity, relatively
    cheap long- and short-range transportation, basic literacy and
    numeracy education, basic modern healthcare, basic policing, etc,
    what exactly more could one want out of necessities? It seems to me
    like it’s mostly entertainment/luxuries and marginal improvements on
    the necessities.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Jesse E says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 10:45 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466420>
        ~new~

        From what I’ve looked at, there actually was a pretty decent gap
        in middle class accouterments until the mid 80’s to early 90’s
        where you could make the argument that the average middle class
        American was better off than the middle class Spaniard or
        Italian even including the various entitlements, but since then,
        it has really evened out where the only difference is that
        American houses are bigger, but more and more, I think that’s a
        combination of cultural differences and the available housing
        stock.

        From what I’ve seen in Google maps, in Europe, even newer
        subdivisions being built still have smaller houses than American
        ones, despite these subdivisions being built in open areas.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466017>
151.
    MathEpic says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 5:55 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466030>
    ~new~

        I regularly call for the existence of a “wal-mart for medical
        care” which usually causes people to recoil in horror even
        though it would probably save people millions of dollars….

    Might I suggest rebranding your proposal a little?

    Just about every time I got something from Walmart in the past few
    years that was not something so basic that it would be hard to mess
    up I ended up regretting the purchase when it broke three weeks later.

    I get what you are trying to say, but perhaps you could compare the
    establishment to a fancy clothing store like [name] and say we need
    a JC Pennies of medical care.

    Just a thought.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
152.
    CatCube says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 7:02 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466048>
    ~new~

    I can’t help but wonder if part of the ever-expanding expenses isn’t
    that we mediate our interactions through the legal system more than
    we used to.

    What got me thinking about it was what I’m working on this week. To
    answer Incurian’s question above about why I was posting during the
    workday, I was avoiding working on a report for selecting a
    contractor for a project I’m working on. (I owe the taxpayer about
    three hours this weekend, since I spent time on Friday here and
    reading about the Oroville Dam spillway.)

    We had contractors submit proposals, and we had two structural
    engineers and a construction quality assurance rep sit in a room for
    three days, writing our individual reports about each proposal, then
    coming to agreement about how we rate them. Then I have to write a
    report summarizing all of our individual reports, which gets fed
    into the arcane machine that will eventually spit out an award. This
    process costs about $10,000, and had zero value for evaluating the
    proposals. However, it has to be done this way or we’ll get dragged
    around in court by an offeror’s lawyer if they choose to make a case
    of their rejection. I think that in years past they’d use a simple
    low-bid process, which has its own problems, or the rejected
    contractors would bitch to their Congressmen or something but
    wouldn’t literally make a federal case of it.

    A sea change in how we see teachers has taken place as well: the
    principal and teachers used to be God in their classroom. A number
    of years back with some relatives at the house we got to talking
    about schools (my mother, aunt, and uncle were schoolteachers). The
    question came up about what would happen if somebody called a
    teacher a “motherfucker” years ago. My dad (who went to the same
    school I did forty years prior to me) said that the principal would
    have thrown the kid down a flight of stairs; he wasn’t being
    hyperbolic. He then told us about how Principal Brown basically
    threw a kid against a wall in front of an all-student assembly for
    giving him lip.

    An author who went to school in the next town over in the early
    1900s (Cully Gage) told a story of his principal who beat a
    classmate with an ironwood cane for some misbehavior. The kid’s
    father went to the principal’s house (these are really small towns,
    even today) to talk to the principal after school and ask him not to
    physically discipline his son; if there was a problem, to let the
    father know and he would take care of it. The principal refused, as
    he saw the discipline of the school as his domain. The father then
    laid the principal out with one punch right on his front porch.

    This would all end up with people in court these days–and that’s on
    balance a good thing! But now when teachers want to discipline
    somebody (or get disciplined themselves) the measures are opaque,
    time-consuming, and (relevant to the OP) expensive. Even if they
    don’t hire a lawyer, the paperwork needs to be done to satisfy one
    in case you get called into court.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
153.
    jhertzlinger says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 9:21 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466093>
    ~new~

    In other words, part of the US economy can deliver goods at steadily
    declining prices but not many jobs and another part of the US
    economy can deliver lots of jobs and costs are going through the
    proverbial roof.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
154.
    dank says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 9:44 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466101>
    ~new~

    Is it really better to compare industry salaries vs average salary?
    Why not salary vs baseline inflation?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
155.
    LukHamilton says:	
    February 11, 2017 at 10:29 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466116>
    ~new~

    I think you gave short shrift to libertarian explanations of this
    phenomena. In particular, the Kling Theory of Public Choice may
    explain a significant fraction of cost disease: public policy will
    always choose to subsidize demand and restrict supply. If you
    restrict supply holding everything else equal, prices will go up. If
    you subsidize demand holding everything else equal, prices will go
    up. If you do both, prices will really go up.

    (1) Healthcare: The government restricts the supply of all
    healthcare professionals (for example, doctors, nurses, CNAs,
    pharmacists, dentists, LPNs, etc.) via occupational licensing. (I
    should note that maybe everyone can get behind the simple idea that
    the number of doctors per 10,000 people in the US should at least
    remain constant over time and not go down, as it has.) It restricts
    the supply of healthcare organizations (for example, hospitals,
    surgery centers, etc.) via onerous regulations, like the very
    ridiculous “certificate-of-need
    <https://www.mercatus.org/publication/40-years-certificate-need-laws-across-america>“.
    You have already explained in previous posts how things like the FDA
    restrict the supply of generic drugs. In terms of demand, the
    government subsidizes health insurance via the corporate income tax
    code, CHIP, the Obamacare marketplace, Medicaid, Medicare, etc.

    (2) Education: I have done less investigation into this sector’s
    regulations. You mentioned Title IX. David Friedman has some nice
    blog posts <http://daviddfriedman.blogspot.com/search?q=law+school>
    on how the American Bar Association’s regulations on law schools
    make cheap law schools impossible. (This same concept also applies
    to healthcare-related professional schools, by the way.) If Bryan
    Caplan is right about signaling, a lot of education involves
    negative externalities, so it should be taxed or limited by the
    government. Instead, it subsidizes demand via loans. K-12 education,
    meanwhile, receives massive subsidies from the government; everyone
    can enjoy a totally free K-12 education.

    (3) Real estate: Land-use regulations restrict the supply of
    housing. (Explanations of this can be found by googling “Matt
    Yglesias housing”.) It also subsidizes housing via Section 8,
    various other HUD programs, Freddie Mac, the mortgage-interest tax
    deduction, etc.

    In short, any industry that the United States government has a heavy
    hand in has/will experience cost disease.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        IrishDude says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 12:41 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466135>
        ~new~

        Yeah, I think I’m an AnCap hammer that sees government nails
        everywhere, but the pattern for health care, education, and real
        estate seems to be heavily regulated supply and subsidized
        demand, with the resultant price increases you’d expect. Not to
        say other sectors aren’t regulated or subsidized too, but these
        three sectors seem to be particular heavy focuses of government
        intervention.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466116>
156.
    CecilTheLion says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 1:13 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466142>
    ~new~

    Somewhere the ghost of Karl Marx is laughing. I think you’ve maybe
    captured the underlying reason that quantity is turning into quality
    ala Trump, the negation of the middle class (the negation of the
    negation?). I don’t really see there being a right wing solution to
    this: as more and more contradictions arise and the population
    bifurcates, more and more social issues will have to be state-ified.

    Education for instance. As we barrel roll towards an economy that
    exports airplanes and imports shirts, more and more people are going
    to have to be educated to maintain such an economy. However, lower
    tradesmen, people in manufacturing, truck-drivers ect. are all
    depreciating into the lower-proletariat, and will thus no longer be
    able to afford the necessary education by which to pull themselves
    out of this condition. But social spending on education can resolve
    this to some extent.

    The same for healthcare. More specialization and knowledge in
    healthcare means more healthcare providers trained in esoteric
    subjects, more esoteric machines ect. Someone of the working poor
    isn’t going to be able to see a spleen-oncologist.

    The climate is crying out for coordinated action that just
    empirically isn’t taking place sans state intervention.

    We’re going to have to be clever about redistribution, much more so
    than we have been: we can’t just brute-force tax without the
    accompanying capital-flight, brain-drain ect. I suspect we’re going
    to need a rise in labour unions for unskilled workers, closing
    loopholes, cracking down on wage-theft, more financial regulation,
    attempting to limit excessive credit, maybe even some socialization
    of investment.

    I think left-liberals can still recommend a good degree of
    deregulation, especially if it’s needed. So if the ‘too much
    regulation’ thing is getting in the way, a liberal party can
    nonetheless pursue left-liberal interests while still tearing down
    some of the regulatory burden. Now, as a left-liberal I don’t
    particularly think this will do much… Well, other than cut down on
    credentialism, which I will grant is probably a legitimate issue.
    Anyway, I think centre-left social democracy might be the best thing
    we can do, even if that ‘solution’ isn’t exactly totalizing. Some of
    these issues, well, we might just have to live with. Sorry if that’s
    unsatisfying. I at least hope to hold up the centre-left tradition
    that seems to be less and less represented on your blog…

    late edit. Maybe one reason productivity growth is slowing is
    zombie-firms; that is, firms that have a profit-rate that merely
    pays off the interest on their loans. Secondly, workers who are
    barely able to pay for their mortgage, student loans, various lines
    of credit. In some sense people are being sucked dry, leading to
    higher rates of default, bankruptcy ect. It can be a brutal,
    destructive squeeze.

    These zombie firms may have to die, and the size of loans may have
    to become smaller again (Marxism would suggest that this might be
    impossible due to the rising organic composition of capital). My
    suspicion is that gains would be made if we moved towards a
    high-wage economy with heavily regulated credit industries, so
    people are less prone to overextend themselves, and so that lending
    becomes less predatory. Again, requiring left-liberalism over a
    right-wing alternative.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        CecilTheLion says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 1:27 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466147>
        ~new~

        I forgot to mention that in /The Wealth of Nations/, Adam Smith
        thought that the cost of rent would increase as the cost of
        consumables went down; i.e., a kind of subsistence wage would be
        enforced by market laws on the lower classes regardless if
        productivity rose. Maybe consumables costs say, 60% of a monthly
        income 50 years ago, but now only costs 30% (too lazy to look up
        the actual costs, these are guesses, my apologies). Thus rent
        can increase in proportion to that. This makes capitalism
        infinitely depressing, but I think there’s a good chance that he
        was correct on this.

        edit. this is a assuming the lower classes aren’t spending
        anything (or much) on health or education; these generally have
        to be cut from lower-budgets.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466142>
          o
            DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 4:20 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466323>
            ~new~

            Could you specify where in /The Wealth of Nations/ the
            passage you describe is? Smith is quite often misinterpreted
            by people for various reasons, so I would like to check on
            whether your description is correct.

            If I had to guess, it’s something coming out of the iron law
            of wages, and the rent in question is not the rent people
            pay for their houses, it’s the rent on the agricultural land
            that feeds people.

            The basic argument there, which appears in variants in
            Malthus and (most sophisticated) Ricardo, is that if income
            is above the level required to maintain the laboring
            population, population increases and that drives wages back
            down. Ricardo makes it explicit that the relevant wage is
            not subsistence in any physical sense but the wage at which
            the masses choose to produce enough children to just replace
            themselves, which depends on tastes as well as the price of
            inputs.

            It’s a clever argument but it doesn’t seem to fit what has
            happened since it was made.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466147>
              +
                CecilTheLion says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 6:48 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466363>
                ~new~

                “All those improvements in the productive powers of
                labor, which tend directly to reduce the real price of
                manufactures, tend indirectly to raise the real rent of
                land. The landlord exchanges that part of his rude
                produce, which is over and above his own consumption, or
                what comes to the same thing, the price of that part of
                it, for manufactured produce. Whatever reduces the real
                price of the latter, raises that of the former. An equal
                quantity of the former becomes thereby equivalent to a
                greater quantity of the latter; and the landlord is
                enabled to purchase a greater quantity of the
                conveniences, ornaments, or luxuries, which he has
                occasion for.” Adam Smith, Vol. I, pg. 229ish

                “In adjusting the terms of the lease, the landlord
                endeavors to leave him no greater share of the produce
                than what is sufficient to keep up the stock from which
                he furnishes the seed, pays the labor, and purchases and
                maintains the cattle and other instruments of husbandry,
                together with the ordinary profits of farming stock in
                the neighborhood. This is evidently the smallest share
                with which the tenant can content himself without being
                a loser, and the landlord seldom means to leave him any
                more.” Smith, Vol I., pg. 130ish.

                Both quotes are lifted from Marx’s 1844 Manuscripts,
                citations may therefore be off in modern editions.

                Yes, Smith does seem to be largely commenting on
                agricultural land. Didn’t realize that. /But/, I still
                think the argument can be transferred: the price of rent
                is resolved by both competition between workers and the
                conflict between tenants and landlords. As workers have
                more disposable income, so they can spend more on rent,
                and it seems like they do.

                —-

                In response to Ricardo (whom I haven’t read),
                productivity has been outpacing population growth,
                therefore wages can’t be entirely pressed down.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466323>
                  #
                    DavidFriedman <http://www.daviddfriedman.com> says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:47 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466500>
                    ~new~

                        In response to Ricardo (whom I haven’t read),
                        productivity has been outpacing population
                        growth, therefore wages can’t be entirely
                        pressed down.

                    Ricardo has two potential defenses. The first is
                    that he is describing long term equilibrium:

                    “Notwithstanding the tendency of wages to conform to
                    their natural rate, their market rate may, in an
                    improving society, for an indefinite period, be
                    constantly above it;”

                    The second is that his natural wage depends on the
                    tastes of the workers. If they are becoming more
                    luxurious, the natural wage will rise, since workers
                    will require a higher wage before they are willing
                    to produce enough children to more than replace
                    themselves:

                    “The friends of humanity cannot but wish that in all
                    countries the labouring classes should have a taste
                    for comforts and enjoyments, ”

                    The person whose prediction most clearly fails to
                    fit the subsequent data is Malthus. His basic
                    argument was that the income of the masses could
                    never be much above what it then was for long, since
                    if it was population would increase and drive wages
                    back down. Since he wrote, the income of the masses
                    of England continued to rise for about two hundred
                    years.

                    Thanks for the Smith quote. I think the first makes
                    implicit use of the iron law. The landlord’s produce
                    will support X workers, so if X workers can produce
                    more than they used to because of technological
                    progress, the landlord’s produce will buy more stuff.

                    Smith knew a lot and wrote well, but Ricardo was a
                    much better economic theorist.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466363>
      *
        talldave2 says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:48 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466311>
        ~new~

        The ridiculousness of the notion that climate and its
        consequences can be forecasted 50 to 100 years out with such
        accuracy and reliability to justify spending trillions now is
        rivalled only by the insanity of supposing non-OECD nations
        would ever take such action under any threat short of military
        occupation.

        These predictions are the intellectual heirs of Ehrlich’s
        forecasts of mass starvation and the claims that oil and many
        other natural resources would be nearly exhausted by the year
        2000, and emissions controls are the better-mannered descendants
        of population controls and other techniques of mass coercion
        dreamt up on the backs of bad modelling.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466142>
          o
            CecilTheLion says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 6:56 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466365>
            ~new~

            Well, even if we grant that the science is crude, and that
            long-term scientific forecasts can indeed be inaccurate or
            wrong, I still wouldn’t grant that therefore we ought to say
            all bets are off. Ok, maybe some prediction about sea-ice is
            wrong, but the state of the Earth does seem to be trending
            in the direction vaguely outlined by the sum of predictions.

            According to the right, we should just cancel any pursuits
            of moving towards greener energy. I don’t think this is
            tenable; even if there’s a chance the right is correct, is
            it worth the risk? We have but one Earth. I’m not rolling
            the dice for some minor uptick in productivity or GDP.
            Carbon taxes and incentivizing green R&D is a major
            undertaking no doubt, but a necessary one, and we have
            macroeconomic tools that we can adjust when green politics
            threatens a hit to our economy (ie. carbon taxes with tax
            rebates — simply introducing incentives).

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466311>
              +
                John Schilling says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 7:54 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466387>
                ~new~

                    According to the right, we should just cancel any
                    pursuits of moving towards greener energy.

                Cite, please? In particular, for the right’s desire to
                see the very substantial private-sector pursuit of
                greener energy be canceled, or for cancellation of any
                pursuit of nuclear energy.

                Your claim is greatly overstated, and diminishes your
                credibility.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466365>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:17 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466393>
                    ~new~

                    https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/trump-british-allies-against-windfarms-golf-courses-scotland

                    ‘When I look out of my window and I see these
                    windmills, it offends me. Nigel, Arron, Andy, you
                    have got to do something about these windmills’

                    If you think there is some meaningful part of the
                    ‘right’ that is unaffiliated with Trump, then
                    ‘citation needed’.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    CecilTheLion says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:28 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466394>
                    ~new~

                    Let me adjust the sentence.

                    According to /some people/ on the right, we should
                    just cancel any /government-led or coordinated/
                    pursuits of moving towards green energy.

                    For the most part I find the right pretty
                    indifferent towards private green industry; they
                    don’t seem to care either way. If you look at the
                    post I responded to, one can hardly say he’s itching
                    that this is a real issue that the private sector
                    will resolve.

                    And I’m not sure I can grab a specific intellectual
                    who formulated this, rather it’s a pop-argument that
                    floats around in social spaces.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    FacelessCraven says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:34 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466395>
                    ~new~

                    @1soru1 – Isn’t wind pretty much the worst of the
                    renewables? Noise pollution, stroboscopic effects to
                    anyone in the shadow, tons of bird strikes,
                    unreliable generation pattern, and so on?

                    Meanwhile, more nuclear energy when?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    1soru1 says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 8:52 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466398>
                    ~new~

                    > Meanwhile, more nuclear energy when?

                    Dunno, you are the one’s in government.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    FacelessCraven says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:00 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466400>
                    ~new~

                    1soru1 – “Dunno, you are the one’s in government.”

                    Would you agree that opposition to nuclear power has
                    been predominantly a left-wing position,
                    historically speaking?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    Cypren says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:30 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466402>
                    ~new~

                        For the most part I find the right pretty
                        indifferent towards private green industry; they
                        don’t seem to care either way….

                    The right-wing position on this tends to be fairly
                    consistent: green energy is fine, but it needs to
                    sink or swim on its own merits, not with lavish
                    government subsidies.

                    Note that the corresponding lavish government
                    subsidies for fossil fuels tend to be a sore point
                    for the right-wing and a significant split between
                    the base and the politicians. But I don’t think I’ve
                    ever heard an argument from someone I would consider
                    ideologically right-wing (as opposed to merely a
                    partisan Republican whose only concern is political
                    victory, and who wants lobbyist contributions), for
                    why fossil fuel subsidies should exist.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    Jack says:	
                    February 12, 2017 at 9:54 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466404>
                    ~new~

                    As far as I can tell, we are talking about “the
                    right” and “the left” because CecilTheLion brought
                    up “the right” in implicitly characterizing
                    talldave2’s position. Regardless of who supports
                    nuclear energy or whether some Republicans are only
                    ideological and others only partisan, does anyone
                    disagree that talldave2’s position is one associated
                    more with “the right” broadly speaking, both
                    ideologically and practically?

                    @Cypren

                    Hasn’t “on its own merits” been mobilized against
                    attempts to approximately internalize externalities
                    in emissions-producing industries? That would blur
                    the line between indifference and opposition.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
                  #
                    FacelessCraven says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 12:35 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466488>
                    ~new~

                    @Jack – “does anyone disagree that talldave2’s
                    position is one associated more with “the right”
                    broadly speaking, both ideologically and practically?”

                    I don’t see why anyone would, no.

                    “Hasn’t “on its own merits” been mobilized against
                    attempts to approximately internalize externalities
                    in emissions-producing industries? That would blur
                    the line between indifference and opposition.”

                    This is the rub. If we can’t agree on what the
                    actual cost of a tech is, we can’t make meaningful
                    comparisons. On the other hand, the status quo is
                    what actually exists, and minus any subsidies that I
                    personally would have zero problem removing, oil
                    costs what it actually costs, while the proper price
                    of CO2 externalities is a hotly-debated and
                    politically fraught topic.

                    Nuclear is relevant because it’s a solution we’ve
                    had for decades, one that we pretty clearly could
                    have gotten consensus on and actually implemented,
                    one that seems like it would be a pretty decent
                    improvement over the status quo, and one that the
                    side most insistent in solving the problem seems to
                    have no interest in persuing whatsoever.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466387>
              +
                talldave2 says:	
                February 13, 2017 at 11:11 am
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466689>
                ~new~

                Right, but you have to be careful about even the
                assumption that CO2 is harmful in the long run. For
                instance, there’s considerable evidence that the Earth
                currently has just barely enough warmth and CO2 to
                sustain human civilization. Colder periods not only
                cause crop failures directly by temp, they also increase
                aridity and lower CO2 (possibly below the levels
                necessary to support mass agriculture of many staple
                food items).

                1soru1/Cypren — “If you think there is some meaningful
                part of the ‘right’ that is unaffiliated with Trump, ”
                National Review published an entire issue titled
                “Against Trump.” I’m more of a libertarian, but don’t
                even ask what Reason thinks of him. Anyways, investment
                in alt-energy should be primarily market-driven, as
                subsidies generally just increase costs and waste (e.g.
                Solyndra/BeaconPower/ThisListCouldFillUpThePage) but
                realistically that is not going to happen even under
                Trump and a GOP Congress — check back next year and
                we’ll still be shoveling many billions of dollars in
                that direction.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466365>
                  #
                    CecilTheLion says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 5:50 pm
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466939>
                    ~new~

                    “Right, but you have to be careful about even the
                    assumption that CO2 is harmful in the long run. For
                    instance, there’s considerable evidence that the
                    Earth currently has just barely enough warmth and
                    CO2 to sustain human civilization. Colder periods
                    not only cause crop failures directly by temp, they
                    also increase aridity and lower CO2 (possibly below
                    the levels necessary to support mass agriculture of
                    many staple food items).”

                    Mind if I ask for a source on that?

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466689>
157.
    Anon256 says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 1:18 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466143>
    ~new~

    Small correction: $2.2B/km is the projected cost for the /next/
    phase of the Second Avenue Subway, if it ever gets funded/built. The
    section that just opened this year cost $1.7B/km.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
158.
    talldave2 says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 1:40 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466151>
    ~new~

    Healthcare spending is a little different, because nearly all
    healthcare spending is marginal, with little effect on LE outside of
    vaccinations, and much is palliative or preventive. One of the great
    healthcare myths is that more preventive/diagnostic spending would
    save money in the long run, but that requires a positive
    identification at a much higher rate than usually obtains, or that
    most people would choose to pay for if they weren’t insulated from
    cost decisions. Do you really need that MRI? Well, for better or
    worse, you’re maybe 3x more likely to get one here in the USA than
    the rest of the OECD.

    Higher education, relic of a time when you had to travel to where
    the books were, has similar problems, but the cost insulation is
    magnified by investor insulation — giving the seller access to
    financing with federal government guarantee of payment is a recipe
    for a disastrous price spiral, and if any other industry were
    saddling teenagers with non-dischargeable six-figure debt for
    products of often questionable value there would talk of jail time
    for the execs. The marginal benefit of a climbing wall or a massive
    pensioned bureaucracy to the process of learning the information in
    your degree program is dubious when sufficiently motivated students
    could generally learn the material on their own anyway (most
    students do not actually spend much time asking questions of their
    professors), and arguments for value in socialization or signalling
    to employers are unpersuasive given the enormous costs.

    Rising income inequality is the great economic shibboleth of our
    time, all it really says is that resources are being allocated by a
    smaller proportion of society, and market-driven gains suggest the
    new allocation is more efficient and makes everyone better off
    (i.e., outside of some obvious cases of rentseeking, consumers are
    rewarding better value propositions). If you look at basic human
    needs, basic consumption inequality is generally dropping (partly
    because producers achieve those gains by expanding markets as
    broadly as possible) and increasingly the remaining consumption
    differences are in signalling rather than welfare (e.g. a nicer car,
    brand names). Would you rather live in the country where everyone is
    equally malnourished or the country where everyone is well-fed but
    only a few have Ferraris?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
159.
    Nornagest says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 2:20 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466156>
    ~new~

    Well, so far we’ve had socialists and anarcho-capitalists tell us
    that this proves their theories. Any way we can get a literal Nazi
    to show up too? An adherent of the Juche Idea?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        CecilTheLion says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 2:45 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466159>
        ~new~

        I’m assuming you’re referring to me, I couldn’t find any leftier
        posts than mine; I just want to say hey man, I’m just a liberal.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466156>
      *
        Anonymous says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 4:29 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466171>
        ~new~

        I dunno about Nazis, but if you want someone on the extreme
        corner of the “Who Bitch This Is” and “There Are Five Lights”
        <http://moosenorseman.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/nickbsteves.jpg>,
        the Death Eaters don’t find these findings surprising. The
        theories this is evidence for are “nobody in charge” and
        “imperial decline”, mostly.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466156>
      *
        registrationisdumb says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 9:30 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466206>
        ~new~

        (Disclaimer: /pol/ aren’t literal Nazis; they just believe the
        Holocaust was a lie, but it should have happened anyway.)

        Judging from my time lurking on /pol/, I think they’d say that
        it’s mostly increased demand, with housing prices being driven
        by immigration and degradation of the family unit due to a
        marxist/jewish plot. Education is the same but with lowering of
        standards. Healthcare prices are due to processed foods and HFCS
        (the liquid Jew). Also combine all of these with parasitism from
        Jews in executive positions selling us Globalism by artificially
        adjusting inflation numbers to make us look richer than we
        actually are and cheap mexican/overseas labour for destroying
        the manufacturing industry.

        They would probably conveniently ignore the construction costs,
        or handwaive it by saying Trump will fix it anyways.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466156>
      *
        IrishDude says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:14 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466285>
        ~new~

        For the record, I think economics, not ancapism, has a good
        explanation for why an entity that restricted supply and
        subsidized demand would be a likely suspect for contributing to
        prices rising over time.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466156>
160.
    benwave says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 4:17 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466168>
    ~new~

    Scott, help me out here because I’ve read a long article about the
    mysterious nature of rising costs in certain sectors as well as
    hundreds of bemused comments, and the article had no more than a
    throwaway paragraph saying that maybe rising inequality is a sign
    that the ‘missing’ money is ending up in the pockets of the
    super-wealthy elite.

    I come from a left-wing perspective, so I hope you can see that to
    me ex nihilo, “the super wealthy are becoming much richer than was
    historically the case, also all of these important services are
    becoming way more expensive than they used to be, but the one does
    not explain the other” looks like an extraordinary claim. I would
    like to see more evidence presented that this is not the case before
    updating in this direction!

    In particular, I can see that a large majority of the odd features
    you have picked out about these services are acting exactly as
    predicted in Das Kapital volume 2, where Marx studies the process of
    realisation of invested capital (ie, money spent on labour,
    materials, tools etc) as the principal plus surplus value in money
    form. In particular, some of his predictions were:

    1. Gains made by workers through collective action in sites of
    production can be taken away again by the landlord, the grocer, the
    financier etc.

    2. The difficulty in the realisation of capital will incentivise
    businesses to strive for monopoly positions (whether by government
    mandate, mutual cooperations, quasi-monopolies such as real estate,
    branding and advertising).

    3. The tensions between the production of surplus value and the
    realisation of surplus value will tend to set certain sectors of
    capital against one another – for example landlords would prefer if
    workers were well paid, but had to spend larger amounts of money on
    rent whereas factory owners would prefer to pay workers as little as
    possible, and that includes low housing costs.

    Later analysis in the tradition of Marx have noticed that financial
    capital these days is doing very very well compared to workers, but
    also compared to traditional industrialists. And four out of the
    five of your examples are fields in which debt and financing plays a
    very large role. It’s pretty easy to see that financial capital
    would be incentivised to make these things more expensive so that
    they can extract more money through larger loans and financing. (I’m
    not certain about subways. Are they typically debt-financed?).

    Financial capital certainly has the economic and political power to
    push for this, and they don’t particularly care if they squeeze
    other holders of capital along they way. They are debt-financed
    fields in which large monopoly powers exist for one reason or
    another. And while I acknowledge that bureacratic bloat is certainly
    playing its role, I’m baffled by the relative lack of consideration
    of normal capitalist tendencies on this thread. As far as I can see
    it is the single most important factor driving up the costs of these
    services. Please present me with evidence that I am wrong about this!

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        CecilTheLion says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 5:11 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466182>
        ~new~

        Excellent commentary. This to me may be a rebuke on centrism:
        you just can’t allow capital to have access to the public purse,
        they’re going to start robbing us to the degree that we allow
        it. The left at least offers the state as a dialectical force
        against private industry, that is, as more of a fight than as a
        capitulation. In our attempts to discredit the inherent
        conflicts under capital, the modern state has given into a
        resignation that it doesn’t even intellectually accept. The
        inherent antagonism ought to be restored, and public-private
        compromises should be resolved into either the private sector or
        the public sector. And my God America, please regulate your
        financial institutions.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466168>
      *
        Cypren says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 7:24 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466190>
        ~new~

        Given that directly-issued federal government loans account for
        92% of the student loan market
        <https://www.measureone.com/psl.php>, it doesn’t seem likely
        that higher education costs are being driven by capital. Unless
        you’re accusing the US Treasury of being an usurious lender at
        that rapacious 4% interest rate. Artificially subsidized demand
        coupled with artificially restricted supply really explains
        everything in this case; it’s not a mystery how the money is
        being spent or where it’s ending up, either. Schools have hired
        more staff per student and are buying much larger and more
        expensive amenities. In some states, schools are also being
        forced to spend more per student than they historically did
        because state aid is decreasing (this is definitely the case in
        California; I’m sure it’s the case in other states as well).

        You could possibly make a case that schools are financing
        unnecessary expansion on debt and that’s what’s forcing their
        costs up, but even if so, that’s an entirely voluntary choice on
        their part. I don’t think anyone can credibly argue that a
        university without a rock climbing gym and massage center is
        failing in its core mission and has no choice but to fall prey
        to rapacious lenders, and schools don’t need to borrow to
        account for reduced state aid if they’re simply raising tuition
        to match every year (which they are).

        Moving on, the healthcare market is not primarily debt-financed,
        so it seems difficult to make a case for how capital is exerting
        undue influence here. Medical debt is considered a terrible
        investment in the financial industry because it is nearly
        impossible to collect on: it sells for less than a penny on the
        dollar
        <http://www.beckershospitalreview.com/finance/this-nonprofit-aims-to-eliminate-1b-in-medical-debt-for-the-nation-s-poorest.html>.
        If capitalists are driving up healthcare bills to drive people
        into debt, they’re doing a pretty lousy job of it.

        The housing market has a stronger case for capital involvement,
        since about 75% of the US residential mortgage market is
        privately controlled, but two things throw a wrench in your
        argument. First, while average housing prices are up, they have
        not risen in anything approaching a uniform manner
        <http://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2016/08/daily-chart-20>.
        For example, the average price of a home in San Francisco is
        785% of the 1980 baseline, while in New York it is 644%. Dallas
        — a city which has experienced a similar economic boom but has
        much less restrictive zoning and housing policy — is only up 255%.

        If lending capital were the driving force behind increased
        costs, you would expect to see much more uniform rises across
        the board as loans became more expensive and lenders spread
        costs (and risk) around as evenly as possible to maximize their
        returns. Instead, what we see are spikes in urban areas
        experiencing economic booms and high immigration (high demand
        for housing) and extreme spikes in urban areas with highly
        restrictive zoning and development laws (limited supply).

        The restrictive cities /are/ experiencing artificial distortions
        due to capitalist interests, but it’s not the lenders doing it —
        it’s primarily the existing homeowners. In addition to the usual
        “I don’t want my neighborhood to change” NIMBYism, there’s
        strong financial incentive for existing homeowners to resist any
        new supply of housing entering the market, because it drives
        their home value up considerably. As long as entrenched
        landowners can control city politics (and in most cities, they
        do so quite effectively), they can strangle any potential
        competition and extract massive rents from the artificially
        constrained supply. As Matt Rognlie pointed out
        <http://origin-www.bloombergview.com/articles/2015-03-27/piketty-s-three-big-mistakes-in-inequality-analysis>,
        Thomas Piketty’s finding of capital’s increasing value in
        /Capital in the Twenty-First Century/ is almost /entirely/ due
        to the increased value of land, primarily land in urban areas.

        So if you want to address the capital problems in the housing
        market, a good place to start is with measures that reduce the
        power of landowners to extract the undeserved gains from their
        land (by which I mean increases in its value that are not due to
        real improvements to the property). A land value tax
        <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_value_tax> is the /coup de
        grace/ here; it immediately seizes the unearned profits and
        redistributes them. The problem is that implementation of such a
        tax will come along with tens of thousands of sob stories about
        people forced to sell homes they can no longer afford, because
        their quaint 50 year old home is sitting on land that’s worth
        millions of dollars due to its location, and they can’t afford
        the taxes. While this is a good thing for the economy and
        society at large, even the most aggressive redistributionists
        usually start to blanch when the necessary outcome is kicking
        little old widows out of the home they’ve lived in for 50 years.
        So it’s not a political solution that’s likely to happen anytime
        soon.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466168>
          o
            benwave says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 2:28 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466262>
            ~new~

            Thanks for your reply. I will consider it more fully later
            but I do want to point out before I do that the private
            sector/public sector division is not the same as a
            capital/Not capital division – just because it’s the state
            doing it, doesn’t mean it isn’t ultimately capital and
            responding to the incentives that capital responds to. In
            the case of publicly financed student loans for example, the
            state still has an incentive to maximise the amount that
            students borrow. (I don’t mean to suggest this is the only
            incentive)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466190>
          o
            benwave says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:32 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466297>
            ~new~

            Apparently I was wrong, I was more curious than tired! So
            here I am back again sooner than expected.

            Regards the education sector I think I broadly agree with
            you, the state as a capitalist actor notwithstanding. (It’s
            news to me that it IS understood where the money is going to
            – from the article and discussion I got the impression that
            this was not well understood.) I don’t understand why
            decreasing state aid would lead to higher spending? Where is
            the money coming from?

            In regards to the healthcare market, though I agree with
            your point on medical debt in particular, debt is not the
            only form of finance. With the medical insurance that the
            majority of people have, financial institutions act as an
            intermediary between the buyers and sellers (patients and
            hospitals), and take a cut of the transactions. They still
            would expect in general to earn more of a cut when the total
            amount of transactions is higher, wouldn’t they?

            I don’t understand your point about the distribution of
            price increases in real estate. In what way is this evidence
            for disinvolvement of capital? I would have thought that
            since real estate lenders are limited in their capital, they
            would want to put most of it into the places earning the
            highest returns, and would have the same incentives as
            anyone else to be investing in boom regions. Real estate, as
            you point out, has the unique distinction of the owners of
            capital being very broadly distributed leading to its unique
            characters such as NIMBYism.

            In general I guess what is most evident to me is that
            financial capital, in all three of these areas, stand to be
            winners when costs increase (the customers stand always to
            lose, the providers face both increases to their revenue and
            to their costs). What I haven’t shown is some kind of clear
            proof that financial capital has influenced matters to raise
            costs, but I hope it’s not contentious that it has both the
            incentives and the means to do so. Given my priors, I will
            tend to predict that that is the case until presented with
            evidence against it.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466190>
          o
            benwave says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:38 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466303>
            ~new~

            One final note as it occurs to me, Marxist analysis often
            comes up against situations where the actions of individual
            capitalists act counter to the interests of capital as a
            whole. So for example, in the medical insurance case, a firm
            is incentivised to increase the total costs of medical care
            for patients they insure. In aggregate, after competition
            between firms, this may lead to (and has led to) a lower cut
            of the total spent amount. This of course leads to greater
            risk, and may culminate in a crisis such as 2008.
            Nonetheless, the incentives do seem to me to point in that
            direction. Some modern Marxist analysis holds that such
            crises are the rule, rather than the exception – or in other
            words that they are a part of the normal functioning of
            capitalism rather than some kind of exception to it, and I’m
            rather sympathetic towards that view.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466190>
          o
            talldave2 says:	
            February 13, 2017 at 11:17 am
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466694>
            ~new~

            /Given that directly-issued federal government loans account
            for 92% of the student loan market, it doesn’t seem likely
            that higher education costs are being driven by capital/

            It’s still a cost when the government pays for it, and when
            you subsidize something you get more of it.

            This irks me personally because I worked 40 hours a week to
            pay my through several years of my college due to the
            byzantine FAFSA process that determined my mother’s fatal
            cancer was some sort of Medicaid windfall, meaning I got to
            enjoy subsidy-inflated prices without a subsidy.

            And yes, it is ridiculous that teenagers can commit to
            six-figure nondischargeable debt for a product of often
            dubious value, and as I said below if any other industry was
            doing so there would be talk of jail time for the execs.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466190>
      *
        John Schilling says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 11:38 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466224>
        ~new~

            maybe rising inequality is a sign that the ‘missing’ money
            is ending up in the pockets of the super-wealthy elite.

        /Which/ super-wealthy elite? Be specific, including the
        mechanisms by which they have driven up the specific costs under
        discussion.

        Scott’s analysis focused on cost growth in education and health
        care – two markets where most of the spending is done by or
        heavily subsidized by the government, where many of the
        providers are run by the government (public schools and
        hospitals), and where the private-sector providers are mostly
        heavily regulated publicly-traded corporations whose books are
        pretty much open and which don’t seem to be making 80-90% net
        profit. And as Cypren notes, these things aren’t being paid for
        by private debt.

        Meanwhile, when I look at lists of the richest people or biggest
        corporations in the world, I find almost exclusively fortunes
        being made by selling cheap consumer goods or base commodities –
        which have /not/ seen massive price increases and in many cases
        have /declined/ in inflation-adjusted price. You can perhaps
        denounce these capitalists as Rapacious Evil Plutocrats for
        their exploitation of sweatshop labor overseas, but not for cost
        inflation in United States or Western Europe.

        Rapacious Evil Plutocrats turn out to be really good at
        providing people with lots of nifty stuff on the cheap.
        Including those educational or health-care niches where the
        government is mostly on the sidelines, e.g. cosmetic surgery.
        When we say, “/This/ market is /too important/ to be left to the
        Rapacious Evil Plutocrats and so the State must take charge!”,
        /then/ we see prices increase by a factor of five or ten. This I
        do not believe is accurately predicted by Marxist theory. But it
        is so.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466168>
          o
            talldave2 says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 5:26 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466345>
            ~new~

            All excellent points! The best allocations of resources
            always seem to be the ones we arrive at voluntarily.

            The starving masses amidst a small cadre of comfortable
            elites seem to be found in precisely the places where
            coercive fairness of the distribution is emphasized over
            voluntary efficiency — Cuba and North Korea.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466224>
              +
                Mark V Anderson says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 10:17 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466414>
                ~new~

                Starving masses in Cuba? There is plenty of reasonable
                dispute about Cuba’s economic prowess, but that is nuts.
                North Korea, yes.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466345>
                  #
                    John Schilling says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 7:52 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466570>
                    ~new~

                    North Korea, yes, fifteen years ago. Though much of
                    the difference between then and now seems to be a
                    Hunger-Games style tolerance of black markets.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466414>
                  #
                    talldave2 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 10:35 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466651>
                    ~new~

                    Yes, Cuba’s poor really are living at or near
                    starvation levels.

                    http://www.nationalreview.com/article/426334/look-how-cubas-working-class-lives-scott-beyer

                    “Those living in the slums suffered Third World
                    conditions, deprived of food, soap, and toilet
                    paper. Farmers there hauled equipment by horse
                    carriage, large families lived in small shacks, kids
                    played soccer barefoot on pavement, and — as I would
                    discover firsthand — mothers offered their daughters
                    to passing gringos.”

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466414>
                  #
                    talldave2 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 11:53 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466709>
                    ~new~

                    And the firsthand account above is not historically
                    unusual, here’s an article from 20 years ago. Maybe
                    you’re not technically starving if you just ate the
                    neighbor’s cat, but most people would characterize
                    it as such.

                    http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/millions-of-cubans-facing-starvation-hunger-is-fuelling-an-exodus-of-desperate-refugees-writes-phil-1417691.html

                    “Under ever-tighter rationing since the collapse of
                    the Soviet bloc, the poorest of Cubans began
                    devouring the cat population last year. Even the
                    tiny allowance of meat in their ration books is
                    rarely available after they queue for hours at state
                    warehouses.

                    ‘Cats were among the first to go since they’re said
                    to taste okay. I had my three robbed from my house
                    in January,’ said Sylvia, a 32-year- old unmarried
                    mother who lives in the Playa district and works as
                    an administrator in a state hospital.

                    ‘I’ve heard of people eating dogs, those little ones
                    that have no fur, but I think that’s the exception.
                    They say dog meat tastes bad and you still see
                    plenty of stray dogs. Most people have drawn the
                    line there. So far.’
                    …
                    The hunger of Cuba’s 11 million people has reached a
                    critical level. Package tourists from Canada, South
                    America or Europe are kept well away from it as they
                    are whisked from airports to hotels in beach resorts
                    such as Varadero. But Cubans without access to US
                    dollars are starving as badly as their Caribbean
                    neighbours in Haiti, the western hemisphere’s
                    poorest nation.
                    …
                    They are allowed half a dozen eggs each a month. The
                    only meat is part of a soya and mincemeat mixture
                    but each is allowed only half a pound a month. Their
                    other monthly rations are: rice – five pounds per
                    person; black beans (a Cuban staple) – one pound per
                    person; sugar – five pounds; salt – one ounce; rum –
                    half a bottle. No soap or toothpaste has been
                    available this year, and asprin is rationed to 10
                    tablets every three months.”

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466414>
161.
    oneMerlin says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 6:20 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466184>
    ~new~

        In the old days, we could combine low taxes with widely
        available education. Now we can’t, and we have to argue about
        which value to sacrifice.

    Uh… no. Our taxes were not low back in the 50’s-70’s. The top rate
    was 91% from WWII until Kennedy, then fell only to 70% until Reagan
    brought them down to under 30%. Suddenly, we’ve had budget issues
    ever since, and the weight of that on society has kept increasing.
    We’re trying to sustain 60’s level benefits with 20’s level cheap
    taxes, and it’s not working.

    Don’t underestimate how much of the cost increases you’re seeing are
    because much of the cost has shifted from the government to the
    consumer. When education was cheaper, it was because we were funding
    virtually all of the cost of public universities through state
    governments as an important part of making society as a whole
    better. Now, we have people arguing that if they aren’t personally
    getting educated /right now/, they shouldn’t have to pay taxes to
    support it. A large part of the cost of any individual hospital item
    is compensation for the ones who can’t pay but need to be helped
    anyway. For some hospitals in poor areas, this can be 50% of the
    cost. Transit is chronically underfunded, therefore service
    degrades, therefore it gets further underused, therefore underfunded…

    This to me seems like the core of the issue, so to separate the
    flight of the rich from taxes and the higher burden on the rest of
    us seems like you’re begging the question.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Anonymous says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 6:55 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466188>
        ~new~

        You’re assuming that a higher tax rate automatically means
        higher taxes. It isn’t that straightforward. The kind of people
        with the kind of money that puts them in that bracket will just
        find hiring tax amelioration lawyers to be cheaper than actually
        paying the rate without protest. If you look at tax revenue as a
        percentage of the budget, it hardly moved despite radical
        variations in the tax rates over time.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466184>
          o
            Jack says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 2:25 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466261>
            ~new~

            How much additional tax revenue you get out of each
            additional per cent point of tax depends, but I have not
            seen any convincing evidence that it’s currently zero or
            negative. Evidence suggesting that the USA is well below the
            optimal income tax is presented here:
            http://www.epi.org/publication/raising-income-taxes/. If you
            could direct me to data for income tax as a per cent of GDP
            going back before 1970 I’d like to see it. I can think of
            many other reasons that total tax income as a fraction of
            GDP did not go far down as the top marginal income tax rates
            decreased, most obviously because the tax base was
            simultaneously broadened. I have seen how tax planning
            decisions for professionals and small businesspeople get
            made, and to me it often looks more like a combination of
            anti-tax rhetoric and spite (I’m paying 0.5% more on
            payroll? WELL I’M GONNA PAY MY TAX LAWYER TWICE THAT BECAUSE
            THE GOVERNMENT IS KILLING MY BUSINESS) than economic
            rationality. Marjorie Kornhauser has studied this for
            decades
            <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/cf_dev/AbsByAuth.cfm?per_id=22192>.
            This conversation has been infected for a long time. In
            Dickens’ Hard Times (1854) the factory owners threaten to
            kick their property into the Atlantic every time the
            government passes a new regulation. Of course, back then the
            regulations were things like a 12 hour maximum working day
            or a stop to child labour, rather than a 0.5% increase on
            payroll or income taxes. (Note that none of this should be
            taken as support for OP’s comment, which does not seem to me
            to respond to SSC’s issue unless coupled with the Marxist
            critique present elsewhere in this thread.)

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466188>
      *
        Nornagest says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:37 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466301>
        ~new~

        Tax revenue as percentage of GDP is essentially flat since WWII
        <https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/FYFRGDA188S>. It is false
        that we had lower taxes in the Fifties and Sixties (they cover
        about the same spread, averaging maybe a point or so higher),
        but it’s also false that we could afford everything back then
        because we were taxing the shit out of the 1%.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466184>
162.
    mariosrichards says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 11:13 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466221>
    ~new~

    [Warning – response only to article, have not read through other
    comments to see if my comments have been made redundant]

    I think the author has picked up three different flawed markets:
    (i) US Healthcare market
    (ii) US Education market
    (iii) US Housing market

    They are all malfunctioning, but for different reasons:

    (i) US Healthcare comes down to principal-agent issues, liability
    focus and the fact that – for political reasons – it’s more
    *healthcare provision* than *healthcare insurance*

    (ii) (Higher) Education is now and has always a prestige good – it’s
    a mistake to look at grades or expect increases in money to equate
    to increases in position – universities have to spend in order to
    retain their prestige rank – and the people paying to attend to
    retain their prestige rank in the labour market.

    It’s not about the “cost of education” – it’s about the cost to put
    yourself ahead of X people – and that obviously depends on how much
    money those people have (many of whom – in the US – will be on
    scholarships for being showing ‘great aptitude’ – so it’s not even
    *their money* you’re competing with).

    (we *might* be looking at a splintering of the higher education
    market into MOOCs which handle prestigeless training – and special
    super expensive Campus Experiences which mostly mark you out as a
    prestige employee (either because you could afford to pay for
    Harvard or because Harvard has already filtered you out as ‘being
    exceptional’)

    (iii) US housing market is suffering from the same problems in
    Europe – the ones most obvious in the UK. Namely, it’s *very hard*
    to prevent current local home owners accruing the political
    power/clout/legislated power to determine which way house prices go.
    Oddly enough, they tend to say “up”.

    To put it another way, Home Ownership is one of *the most
    successfully unionised and recognised industries in the UK*.

    It’s a union so powerful and all-encompassing that it doesn’t even
    require any of the usual trappings that mark a union – because all
    of those things are a means of creating a consistent position and
    multiplying political power. When you already have a consistent
    position and all the political power you could ask for … traditional
    union infrastructure is actually just a liability (a lightning rod
    for discontent).

    Nothing wrong with unions per se … but, like any trade association,
    there needs to be a political counterforce and political oversight
    to stop it turning into a monopolistic organisation for optimising
    rent-seeking.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Anonymous says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 12:35 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466235>
        ~new~

        Re: Housing, one factor that drives up prices is also the
        presence of significant amounts of minorities in America, and a
        blanket ban on discrimination. You can’t put “no $minority
        allowed” on a housing advert, but you can put the price in a
        range that most minorities can’t pay.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466221>
          o
            Creutzer says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 2:08 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466252>
            ~new~

            Does anybody have insight into how much of a factor this is
            in the UK and France?

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466235>
163.
    shakeddown <https://shakeddown.wordpress.com/> says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 12:36 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466236>
    ~new~

    An example of how a rich society has seemingly-necessary expense
    that a poorer society doesn’t: In the american military, they fill
    up magazines to the full 30 bullets (which wears them down), then
    throw them away after each use. In the Israeli military, they only
    put 29 bullets, and reuse them. This seems like the sort of expense
    that could generalize to cause cost disease.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        The Nybbler says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 1:40 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466247>
        ~new~

        I’m fairly certain the American military doesn’t throw away
        rifle magazines after each use(!), though I could believe they’d
        accept a higher wear rate.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466236>
          o
            FacelessCraven says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 6:24 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466358>
            ~new~

            To my understanding, in a combat situation mags are treated
            as disposable. When your rifle mag is empty, you flick it
            out on the floor
            <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QbOYGDksIS8> while reaching
            for a new one, rather than taking the time to stow it in a
            pocket first. Given that fast reloads can easily be a
            significant factor in survival, this is a cost effective
            strategy. If time allows, you can always collect up spent
            mags after the area is secure, but losing a couple after a
            firefight isn’t really a serious problem; the mags don’t
            cost all that much more than the ammo inside them, and
            actual combat is relatively rare. During range training,
            mags are obviously easily recoverable.

            The usual rationale I hear for down-loading magazines is to
            increase reliability, not to control costs, and usually in
            the context of more esoteric weapons from the 40s to 70s.
            Designing a 30-round mag that actually, reliably can hold 30
            rounds isn’t magic, and modern mags shouldn’t have any wear
            issues from routinely being fully loaded. I would imagine
            most mags are damaged or worn out by landing badly on
            concrete or metal flooring, resulting in damage to the feed
            lips or cracks/dents to the mag body.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466247>
164.
    supermunchkin93 says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 12:37 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466237>
    ~new~

    Ok, so here’s my view on this.

    During the industrial revolution, the economy ran almost entirely on
    the backs of the working class. If you wanted to make something, you
    had to employ A LOT of people. As a result, value (and I mean the
    abstract idea of true economic value) was extremely dispersed
    throughout the economy. Each person could add a lot by joining the
    workforce, and likewise reduce the value of the economy by leaving
    it. As a result, a product, be it education or housing or movie
    tickets or cars, would gain the most profit by including the most
    number of consumers. Each person had a lot of value and thus lot of
    buying power.

    Fast forward 50 years and humans have simply lost a lot of value to
    the economy. With decreases in inefficiency and the rise in
    automation and cheap labor, people have less real value and less
    buying power. The real value in the economy now lies in equity. As
    the economy slowly becomes more and more self sufficient (as in,
    people don’t need to do as much) value resides more and more in
    those who own the output of the system.

    Today, goods don’t get the most profit by spreading prices to
    include as many people as possible. They get the most value by
    targeting the highest value consumers. Colleges don’t need to be
    priced toward everybody anymore because everybody doesn’t control
    value. Colleges get the most bang for their buck by being priced
    extremely high so that only the extremely wealthy can afford them.
    It’s not that they intentionally target the rich. It’s that it’s a
    highly scarce good that some people can and will pay exorbitant
    prices for so the price naturally adjusts. Same with housing. Same
    with healthcare.

    This has become my working model over the past year. And with
    automation and AI set to take off, this won’t get any better. In
    fact, this will get much, much worse.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
165.
    glorkvorn says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 2:49 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466273>
    ~new~

    I’m thinking that a lot of this can be explained by the Pareto
    Principle (80% of the effort 20% of the reward, and 20% of the
    effort for 80% of the reward, except we’re way past 80 20 now, and
    it’s more like 99.99% to 0.01%), plus a greater amount of empathy in
    our society and a lower risk tolerance. The schools, hospitals, and
    houses that of the past worked pretty well for /most/ people. But if
    you’re one of the unlucky ones that they don’t work for, life was
    pretty rough.

    Learning disability? Expel them. Chronic Disease? Let ’em die. House
    full of lead paint? Eh, everyone’s got 8 children anyway, who cares
    if one of them gets brain damage. Construction? 22,000 people died
    in the construction of the Panama Canal, and that was considered
    acceptable. That seems to be the general attitude of people in the
    past (at least according to the super anecdotal evidence of what
    it’s like in books I’ve read).

    This might not show up as any one particular budget item. There’s
    probably no “safety” budget, for example, just a general expectation
    that safety is important, no matter the cost, and maybe some highly
    paid consultants working diligently to make things even more safe,
    by adding yet more paperwork and procedures and expensive equipment
    to every single thing we do.

    Overall it’s a very positive thing for society that our empathy for
    the vulnerable is increasing. But in a strictly utilitarian sense,
    it is a bit inefficient to spend billions of dollars pushing up
    safety levels just slightly higher, rather than just giving the
    money to people directly.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        glorkvorn says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:45 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466308>
        ~new~

        Oh, and the same sort of Pareto Principle problem also comes up
        in finance. You can make a pension fund that’s solvent for 95%
        of the years, no problem. But if the fund is supposed to last
        forever, that last 5% really becomes a problem. You can’t rely
        on stocks, or any other high-expectation-but-risky investment,
        so you have to rely on “sure bets” like government bonds, and
        then you need a massive fund to pay out enough.

        Likewise, in health insurance, you can charge a reasonable price
        for insurance that will cover the majority of people the
        majority of the time. But what about that one person who needs
        24/7 attention from a skilled team of health professionals, plus
        dozens of different drugs? That one person blows up the costs
        for everyone else. With Obamacare, there’s no lifetime limit on
        how much insurance can pay out, so they have to budget for a
        chance (even a very small one) that you might end up needing
        literally billions of health care costs over your life.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466273>
166.
    Fenster says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 3:09 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466281>
    ~new~

    Re higher ed.

    Yes the causes of the large increase in costs is multiple and all of
    the various arguments have some merit, including the Delta Cost
    Project’s noting of higher administrative costs. Plus the rock
    climbing walls and so forth. I get where you are coming from with
    flat salaries but I would still think that some of the bad bad admin
    cost increase we bemoan do not relate only to staff for rock
    climbing walls. Some pertain to support for instruction and as such
    can be thought of as additional costs that tend to support Baumol’s
    premise. I will also mention that I think the tuition cost increases
    you use to drive the analysis are gross sticker price tuition
    increases. But as tuition has gone way up so has tuition discounting
    (and federal aid), meaning the rate of increase average net cost is
    substantially flatter than the rate of sticker price increases.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        talldave2 says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:41 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466306>
        ~new~

        It’s still a cost if taxpayers pay for it.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466281>
          o
            Fenster says:	
            February 13, 2017 at 5:00 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466909>
            ~new~

            Oops good catch on the external aid. But the larger issue by
            far is the internal discounting of tuition by the
            institutions themselves. That is not a cost since the
            institutions do not spend what their nominal tuitions would
            indicate but only their net tuitions after discounting,
            which can easily get to 40%-50% of sticker price.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466306>
167.
    talldave2 says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 3:40 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466304>
    ~new~

    BTW housing and infrastructure cost increases are not a mystery —
    you can still build those same bridges, houses and buildings for
    more or less what it used to cost in real dollars, but no one would
    be allowed to live in them or travel on them, and few would want to
    (especially if you used, say, asbestos), plus you couldn’t spend
    huge amounts on environmental impact studies and other things
    society has deemed more valuable since those days.

    One of the great unremarked graphs of our time is one of house fires
    by year per capita — they’ve been dropping steadily for 100 years
    because of rising standards, and the same is true of virtually all
    similar issues (except some created in part by those standards, such
    as the use of asbestos).

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Nornagest says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:48 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466312>
        ~new~

        I’m given to understand that the decline in house fires is
        largely down to widespread use of drywall, which is /cheaper/
        than the old lath-and-plaster method.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466304>
          o
            talldave2 says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 3:49 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466314>
            ~new~

            Lath-and-plaster is not particularly flammable, the bigger
            problem was the newspaper stuffed in the cracks. But it’s
            not just building materials, risks from carpets and
            mattresses and other interior fire hazards have also been
            reduced over time.

            I was curious so I Googled — apparently (if we can trust
            random contractors on the intertubes) it was a layered
            transition that started around 100 years ago. I didn’t find
            any good sources on historical flammability standards for
            insulation and consumer goods but I know they’ve changed
            considerably just since I was young.

            http://www.contractortalk.com/f49/when-did-drywall-come-into-common-use-124105/

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466312>
      *
        baconbacon says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 3:58 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466318>
        ~new~

            BTW housing and infrastructure cost increases are not a
            mystery — you can still build those same bridges, houses and
            buildings for more or less what it used to cost in real
            dollars, but no one would be allowed to live in them or
            travel on them, and few would want to (especially if you
            used, say, asbestos), plus you couldn’t spend huge amounts
            on environmental impact studies and other things society has
            deemed more valuable since those days.

        The house I live in is 100 years old, and the only things that
        it is made of that wouldn’t be used to day is some lead paint
        (painted over a few times) and nob an tube wiring (disconnected
        and rewired a few years ago).

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466304>
          o
            talldave2 says:	
            February 12, 2017 at 5:15 pm
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466341>
            ~new~

            Wolman first invented his process 70 years ago (and of
            course it’s changed a lot since), drywall came into common
            use around 60 years ago, fiberglass insulation dates to
            1932, synthetic carpets became popular around 60 years ago,
            major appliances have changed regularly… I could go on.
            Unless you’re building a cabin out in the woods somewhere,
            the building inspector is going to laugh at your 1916
            building materials… and then make you tear it down.

            Log in to Reply
            <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
            Hide ↑ <#comment-466318>
              +
                baconbacon says:	
                February 12, 2017 at 8:51 pm
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466397>
                ~new~

                Double wall brick house- Drywall is mostly cosmetic,
                windows would be an issue as far as insulation but a
                fair number of houses have 100 year old windows in them
                + storms which isn’t killing cots, fiberglass isn’t
                needed. Lots of things make it more comfortable (natural
                gas boiler rather than coal heat) but the things that
                you HAVE to have aren’t murdering you with their costs.

                Log in to Reply
                <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
                Hide ↑ <#comment-466341>
                  #
                    talldave2 says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 10:47 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466665>
                    ~new~

                    I don’t know if you can get a permit for a Franklin
                    stove in a modern building, but it’s unlikely they
                    would let you insulate your roof with 1916
                    materials. At any rate, the vast majority of people
                    want central heating and central air and modern
                    appliances, and that drives costs.

                    At the same time all those things are actually
                    getting cheaper to make — even brickmaking has
                    probably seen its share of advances — but not fast
                    enough to keep up with the additional demands for
                    functionality by customers and regulators. The other
                    main driver of costs seems to be unit labor costs,
                    but that cuts both ways since better-paid laborers
                    can afford more housing.

                    And of course that only covers new construction, a
                    lot of housing pricing disparities are driven by
                    zoning decisions that prevent new construction from
                    absorbing housing demand in many areas.

                    The fire hazard permitting has become a bit
                    ridiculous. When I had my first condo built in 1999,
                    I was not allowed to move in for the first month
                    because the inspector had decided adjustable vents
                    on the ceiling were a fire hazard because a small
                    child might accidentally close the vent with a ball.
                    The delay increased the cost to me by thousands of
                    dollars, and I was told it was not atypical.

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466397>
                  #
                    baconbacon says:	
                    February 13, 2017 at 11:59 am
                    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466712>
                    ~new~

                        I don’t know if you can get a permit for a
                        Franklin stove in a modern building, but it’s
                        unlikely they would let you insulate your roof
                        with 1916 materials.

                    Roof is un insulated as it is (well the large air
                    gap that the attic traps acts as insulation). Wood
                    burning stoves are still legal in many places.

                        At any rate, the vast majority of people want
                        central heating and central air and modern
                        appliances, and that drives costs.

                    We can get a multi split system installed in our
                    house for ~ 10% of its purchase price, our
                    appliances (stove, refrigerator, dishwasher, chest
                    freezer, hot water heater, washer/dryer) probably
                    combine to add ~3-4% to the total purchase price. We
                    had the whole house rewired to replace knob and tube
                    for 5-6% of the purchase price.

                    Insulating the attic is ~1% of total purchase price.

                    Long story short the actual cost of the modern parts
                    of our house are fairly low, most of the housing
                    costs appear to be land driven when I look around
                    (an empty lot 3-4 blocks from us and the same size
                    is listed at 75% of the cost of our place).

                    Hide ↑ <#comment-466397>
168.
    JShots says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 5:07 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466339>
    ~new~

    It seems to me that part of the increased costs in education is that
    new technology doesn’t replace something else. We’re not adding
    computers and suddenly not having to pay a teacher. Technology is an
    add-on cost in this instance (buying + maintaining). Also, my
    teacher friend says that costs for standardized testing have
    sky-rocketed as these private testing companies try to squeeze
    everything they can out of the schools because they know they can.
    Also, I think, administrative bloat pertaining to increased
    adherence to laws, etc.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
169.
    Glossy <http://lazyglossophiliac.blogspot.com> says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 5:33 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466349>
    ~new~

    /“There is some heterogenity across races – white students’ test
    scores increased 1.4% and minority students’ scores by about 20%.”/…

    /Most likely this was the general improvement in minorities’
    conditions around that time, giving them better nutrition and a more
    stable family life./

    Illegitimacy increased during that period. And gains from nutrition
    were probably maxed out before that period started. However, the
    share of Asians within the minority category went up between 1975
    and 1985. That should have raised minority scores for HBD reasons.
    Enough to explain all of that rise? Can’t say offhand, but it
    shouldn’t be difficult to calculate that.

    /Countries like South Korea and Israel have about the same life
    expectancy as the US but pay about 25% of what we do./

    The more laissez-faire an economy is, the more economic activity it
    produces. But a lot of that extra economic activity is irrelevant or
    harmful to the real standard of living. This is likely why the US
    has a higher per capita GDP than most Euro countries, but about the
    same subjective standard of living.

    The profit motive in healthcare leads doctors to prescribe meds and
    order procedures that patients don’t really need. It’s well-known
    that the US healthcare system spends more money on the last year of
    life than Euro healthcare systems. They try to sell more product, to
    drum up more business for themselves. These incentives are absent in
    state-run systems.

    Also, US society is more litigious than most. Doctors do unnecessary
    tests and procedures to cover their asses in case of lawsuits.

    /Some people have pointed out that hospitals have switched from
    many-people-all-in-a-big-ward to private rooms./

    You can’t apply that to the cost of building new NYC subway lines.
    The only service improvements I can think of in the 25 years that
    I’ve been using the subway are electronic cards instead of metal
    tokens, electronic displays showing when trains will probably arrive
    and wifi at some stations. Those are cheap, small changes.

    /Fifth, might the increased regulatory complexity happen not through
    literal regulations, but through fear of lawsuits? /

    Yes, I think that institutional, lawsuit-related risk tolerance is
    much lower in the US now than it was, say, in the middle of the 20th
    century. And that it’s lower in the US than in modern China, for
    example. How much of the increased subway construction cost was
    taken up by safety measures for the workers and safety testing for
    passengers? I doubt that the subway is much safer now than it was 50
    years ago. It should be easy to get those statistics. But I can
    easily imagine the cost of safety measures ballooning.

    I think that the increase in litigiousness and institutional risk
    aversion is related to the decrease in trust and cohesiveness. And
    that comes with increased diversity. Things that used to be settled
    informally or accepted without complaint (“life happens”) are now
    formally complained about or taken to court. And in homogenous,
    cohesive countries like Japan or China most of this stuff would
    still be handled informally. There would probably be social taboos
    against complaining, causing unnecessary work and trouble for
    others. And this was true in America at some point too.

    If people don’t trust each other informally, their relations with
    each other get more institutionalized, formalized, legalized. And
    that costs money

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
170.
    John Keltz says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 6:21 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466357>
    ~new~

    Part of the increase in K-12 costs is probably increased total staff
    as a compensation for declining teacher quality. In 1970, the
    average woman who went into teaching had higher test scores
    <http://www.economics.uci.edu/files/docs/workingpapers/2002-03/Bacolod-02.pdf>
    (page 37) because there was far less opportunity for women in other
    professions than there is today.

    The percentage change in test scores is not well-defined. Test
    scores aren’t scaled so that zero is equivalent to no knowledge- the
    scaling is arbitrary. So a test with a different arbitrary scale
    would have a different percentage gain. Of course, this is somewhat
    semantic, because achievement growth has been small relative to cost
    either way.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        educationrealist says:	
        February 12, 2017 at 11:12 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466427>
        ~new~

        “Part of the increase in K-12 costs is probably increased total
        staff as a compensation for declining teacher quality.”

        Teacher quality isn’t declining, but even if it was (I’ll deal
        with that in a second), more stupid teachers aren’t hired to
        compensate for the loss of one smart one. The idea is absurd.
        And there’s vanishing little evidence that smart teachers are
        better teachers, despite years of trying to prove otherwise.

        Now, it’s true that fewer really bright women go into teaching,
        but the mean intelligence of teachers has only declined slightly
        over this time
        <https://educationrealist.wordpress.com/2013/10/31/teacher-quality-report-lacking-a-certain-quality/>
        and it’s not a huge problem because the average intelligence of
        men entering teaching has increased. Also during that time, more
        blacks and Hispanics became teachers, and their test scores are
        lower, which probably explains the increase in the lower IQ
        range. And while research has disappointed on smarter=better,
        it’s done a bangup job of showing that black students in
        particular do better with black teachers.

        Incidentally, it’s simply untrue that teachers aren’t terribly
        intelligent and most knowledgeable people don’t even suggest it
        anymore. Teacher credential tests have done much to wipe out a
        whole range of black and Hispanic teachers, which probably isn’t
        the best thing, given the research. High school academic
        teachers have always come from the top half of the SAT range
        <https://educationrealist.wordpress.com/2012/01/15/teacher-quality-pseudofacts-part-ii/>,
        while elementary school teachers come from just under the average.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466357>
171.
    Polymath says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 7:05 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466368>
    ~new~

    Shortest summary: systems become dominated by the parasites who game
    them when no immune mechanism exists. America is stupider than other
    nations at protecting its institutions against such abuses.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
172.
    enoriverbend says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 10:44 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466418>
    ~new~

    “education costs have doubled, college costs have dectupled, health
    insurance costs have dectupled, subway costs have at least
    dectupled, and housing costs have increased by about fifty percent”

    “might markets just not work?”

    You’re kidding, right?

    The inflation rate for your examples pretty much follows the amount
    of government regulation or involvement.

    Education? Highest. Health insurance? Really high — now. Housing
    costs? See zoning, rent control, etc.

    But food? Some government regs, sure, but we don’t have government
    grocery stores (like education) and there’s not yet any ObamaFood.
    And that’s one example you gave in the charts that is not inflating
    at a rapid rate. See also what happened to air fares after the big
    airline deregulation…

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
173.
    Emerich says:	
    February 12, 2017 at 11:27 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466433>
    ~new~

    A critical factor is the differential growth of productivity in
    labor-intensive vs. other sectors. The huge increases in
    productivity over the past 50 years has led to real wage increases.
    However, productivity in some sectors, such as IT, computers,
    communications, and manufacturing, have risen much more than in
    industries that have not, or have been unable to, exploit
    technology–such as education. It still takes an hour to give a
    one-hour lecture, and professors still lecture they way they have
    since Socrates. But professors’ wages have to rise to keep them from
    defecting to IT, info, etc. sectors. That said, the lack of
    competition in education and some other fields has also played an
    important role in insulating education. Example: the ivy leagues are
    exempt from certain anti-trust provisions, which permits them to
    collude on things like tuition assistance and scholarship policies.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
174.
    onyomi says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 12:42 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466495>
    ~new~

    I found this speech
    <http://www.chronicle.com/article/The-Great-Shame-of-Our/239148/> on
    adjunctification in the humanities quite good at describing the
    problem, if not necessarily its deeper sources and/or solution.

    Part of it is definitely the Molochy incentive structure whereby
    academic departments obtain the funding and sense of importance to
    justify the existence of tenure-track jobs precisely by offering far
    more opportunities for obtaining the credential (a humanities PhD)
    than actual jobs.

    This seems much related to a dynamic described by others in the
    comments whereby it’s better for one’s prestige, if you’re in a
    managerial position, to hire several poorly-paid underlings than one
    well-paid equal. I guess the normal market mechanism to combat this
    would be: companies whose managers put their own prestige within the
    company ahead of the profitability of the company get outcompeted.

    But the metrics for demonstrating an individual academic
    department’s contribution to a university are things like “how many
    PhDs produced,” not something simple like increased sales.

    This seems somewhat like a disutility of scale, disconnect between
    inputs and outputs, as well as mission vagueness: universities,
    especially, are many different things to many different people
    (donors, students, professors, administrators, etc.) and get their
    money in many different ways, further creating a disconnect even
    beyond that of “students get subsidized loan.”

    Though there’s still the bigger question of how, when almost
    everyone agrees that teaching is central to the mission of a
    university, they could now devote less than 1/3rd of their money to
    that mission, even as more and more money comes in. I guess it’s
    related to the above weird incentives and disconnects, but even
    then, it’s hard to explain. I guess little disconnects and bad
    incentive structures can, over time, result in mindboggling results
    no one wanted, but which were the inevitable result of allowing them
    to continue.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
175.
    nisheeths says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 1:07 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466514>
    ~new~

    Your essay shows that the increase in costs is not because of
    increased wages or increased profits. Economically speaking, the
    only possibility that remains is that it has occurred because of
    increased capital investment, no?

    But what possible incentive might there be to promote capital
    investment with no apparent benefit for economic productivity?

    I think one possible explanation is that institutions have a covert
    incentive to create as many jobs as possible without reduction in
    profit margins. The mechanism for this incentive to arise stems from
    the structural incentives of administrators and middle-managers in
    these institutions.

    If you look at healthcare and education sectors as economic firms,
    the bloat in their respective workforces and capital base seems
    mysterious. If you look at them as the two largest life-rafts from
    economic refugees of globalization and automation, the bloat becomes
    easier to rationalize.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        Nornagest says:	
        February 13, 2017 at 1:13 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466517>
        ~new~

            Economically speaking, the only possibility that remains is
            that it has occurred because of increased capital
            investment, no?

        Increased rents is more likely.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466514>
      *
        marlowcharles says:	
        February 13, 2017 at 4:08 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466543>
        ~new~

        I beleive that your last paragraph is on the correct track.

        (Had to trawl through to the second to last comment to find one
        that jived)

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466514>
      *
        baconbacon says:	
        February 13, 2017 at 10:10 am
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466630>
        ~new~

            Your essay shows that the increase in costs is not because
            of increased wages or increased profits. Economically
            speaking, the only possibility that remains is that it has
            occurred because of increased capital investment, no?

        You could have an increased regulatory burden, increased taxes,
        or decreasing productivity.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466514>
176.
    eliwilliam2020 says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 7:24 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466564>
    ~new~

    You talk about average wages, but not about growth in employment in
    these sectors. Since 1970
    <https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/economic-trends/2013-economic-trends/et-20130110-employment-in-education-and-healthcare-services.aspx>employment
    in these sectors went from 6% of the workforce to 15%. That’s very
    expensive.

    Hanson says that healthcare is primarily about signalling care, not
    health. Caplan says that school is primarily about signalling good
    work, not education. If either or both of them are right, then the
    amount we spend and the number of people we employ in these
    industries is one of the worst things in the developed world.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
177.
    P. George Stewart says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 9:32 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466604>
    ~new~

    Isn’t this just the “hidden inflation” that some economic
    commentators of an Austrian bent have been warning us for years about?

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
178.
    dwietzsche <https://dwietzsche.wordpress.com/> says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 10:09 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466629>
    ~new~

    I guess I don’t really understand why it would be difficult to
    figure out where the money is going in a situation where we have
    increased costs for services over time. There are records, right? I
    don’t expect SA to personally engage in an accounting exercise, but
    this is just an accounting exercise.

    I find statements like this to be particularly perplexing though:

        There was some argument about the style of this graph, but as
        per Politifact the basic claim is true. Per student spending has
        increased about 2.5x in the past forty years even after
        adjusting for inflation.

        At the same time, test scores have stayed relatively stagnant.
        You can see the full numbers here, but in short, high school
        students’ reading scores went from 285 in 1971 to 287 today – a
        difference of 0.7%.

    Like, obviously, whatever result you might expect to get out of an
    education system, it would be crazy to think the result you were
    paying for would be measured by test scores. It doesn’t make sense.
    Even if we’re doing an efficiency assessment, the most important
    number is not going to be the average test score (this really hurts
    my head) but the quantity of students being cranked out of an
    institution with satisfactory competencies which the tests only
    exist to confirm. How many more students are we graduating? I would
    be surprised if it were 2.5x the number of students we were
    graduating in 1971, but I would also be surprised if the number was
    insignificant as well.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
179.
    robotpliers says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 11:24 am
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466699>
    ~new~

    I have a few more specific links to share now. Again, this is mostly
    the result of higher-level decisions, or decisions made elsewhere
    within the US and the global economy. The sectors you highlight are
    mostly protected from external competition, and the US is running
    net external and internal budget deficits while under pressure to
    funnel as much money up to the top 1% as possible while shielding it
    from foreign investors, so these sectors become the natural money
    sinks in the economy for our domestic rich to inflate. The people
    who work in them aren’t the beneficiaries in terms of increased
    salaries and benefits, beyond simply having somewhat more secure
    jobs than the rest of the country.

    Here are the more detailed links that get at some of the underlying
    structure:

    American Thermidor
    (http://truth-out.org/archive/component/k2/item/53403:stirling-newberry–american-thermidor
    <http://truth-out.org/archive/component/k2/item/53403:stirling-newberry--american-thermidor>):
    An explanation of the cycle of energy deficits, import/export flows,
    and wealth concentration at the top that, as a side effect, leads to
    the inflation in costs you document above.

    A World Half Free: Neo-Mercantilism and Trade
    (http://www.dailykos.com/stories/2006/1/25/181190/-): A more direct
    explanation of stealth protectionism, the new triangle trade, and
    the problems that trading between free and unfree economies creates.
    Again, this is a look at higher level structures that result in what
    you document in your post.

    And further explanations and context here:
    http://www.dailykos.com/stories/2005/12/5/169646/-
    http://www.dailykos.com/stories/2005/12/6/169882/-

    More available for perusal here, especially with a focus on the 2004
    – 2006 timeframe: http://www.dailykos.com/blogs/Stirling%20Newberry

    These were all written back around 2005/06, so references to
    politics and decisions of the time are a bit dated, but the
    underlying structures remain in place. In fact, Stirling was too
    optimistic about how quickly we would break free from the trap we’re
    in. Instead of a break in 2008 we got Obama, and instead of a break
    in 2016, we got Trump. Going to be 2020 or 2024 at this rate, with
    the likelihood of a real war becoming higher as we push real change
    back further.

    (Parenthetically, these links also explain why you, Scott, have
    observed that social change is so hard but “biological” change (e.g.
    removing lead from gas, paint, etc.) is relatively easy. This
    observation is only true in the current era because we are actually
    living in a hugely stagnant and increasingly regressive global
    political economy. Basic change is not on the table, hasn’t been for
    decades, arguably most of a century, but it will be again as soon as
    the current system hits limits and we start crashing out. Since
    we’ve delayed changes for so long, emphasis on “crashing.”)

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
180.
    hls2003 says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 12:40 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466737>
    ~new~

    Forgive me if this point has been made already; the comments
    ballooned over 900 while I wasn’t paying attention this weekend. But
    isn’t a plausible explanation simply a version of the law of
    diminishing returns? Once you reach a basic level of
    competency/proficiency in most fields, any further advances become
    progressively more expensive. Life expectancy is a great example –
    the low-hanging fruit of infant mortality, sanitation, and basic
    nutrition has been plucked. The days of adding decades to the
    average life expectancy are over; everything else is at the margins.
    Because of that, the progress at the margins becomes massively more
    expensive when compared to the earlier era that had plucked the
    low-hanging fruit.

    The same could be said of education, infrastructure, and housing.
    Once you have near-universal literacy, improve nutrition, reduce
    lead poisoning, and (I suppose) get the basic pedagogical structure
    in place for how to teach students, then everything else is just
    messing around at the margins – Smart Boards and classroom iPads and
    programming classes and educational BluRays instead of film strips.
    The old subway projects figured out the basic engineering of “put a
    train underground” and had the low-hanging fruit of less-developed
    areas. The new ones are safer, more comfortable, and also have to be
    built in already-occupied high-intensity developed areas. Once you
    get the basics of housing with indoor plumbing and electricity
    developed on open spaces, everything else since then is improved
    comfort, regulated safety, size, competing for space in a more
    highly developed area. The basic problems have all been solved; the
    remaining incremental improvements come at an ever-increasing cost
    for each successive marginal gain.

    It seems to me that’s the likely physical explanation for what’s
    happening. The costs are more or less distributed everywhere –
    increased management bureaucracy in education and healthcare and
    infrastructure (to implement the marginal “improvements” in
    regulation, planning, non-discrimination, client support, etc.);
    increased numbers of worker hours (to implement electrical conduit
    instead of Romex or to build an extra story or to glass-in a steam
    shower instead of a basic tub or to reduce student ratios below
    20-1); increased planning costs (e.g. more engineers to chart loads
    under extra buildings above the tunnels); newer higher-cost
    materials and equipment (to reduce environmental impacts, allow
    cutting edge medical testing and treatment, pass FDA trials for your
    new drugs). So you wouldn’t expect them all to fall in one sector
    like “skyrocketing salaries for one class of worker.” They’ll show
    up in every category, wherever there is marginal improvement over
    the already-mostly-competent earlier baseline.

    This, it seems to me, is actually key to understanding Scott’s point
    about “Why don’t we just have the cheaper older alternative, this
    would practically eliminate funding concerns.” All of the sectors
    he’s talking about are areas where government is heavily involved
    (primary education is obvious; college is almost entirely federally
    funded at this point; infrastructure has a heavy government spending
    component and is highly regulated; and housing is controlled very
    significantly by zoning and building code regulations). Scott says
    “government vs. private doesn’t seem to make a difference,” and /in
    those sectors/ he’s generally right, because it isn’t government
    /provision/ of the services that is 10x less efficient (I would
    argue it’s some amount less efficient, but would stipulate it isn’t
    anywhere near an order of magnitude). Rather, it’s that government
    involvement in those sectors – particularly in our democratic
    culture – tends to /mandate uniform minimum standards/ for quality
    and service provision. And due to the diminishing returns going
    after higher and higher fruit, as the standards rise, costs
    everywhere balloon. So the problem isn’t that government-run
    healthcare is terrible and unaffordable because it’s government-run
    and government is bad; it’s that between Medicare, Medicaid,
    regulation, and even tort law (note: also a function of government),
    the standard of care tends to be inflated to whatever the current
    state of the art may be. And the current state of the art will,
    inevitably, call for vastly more cost for only marginal gains. The
    problem isn’t only that schools are government-run; it’s that every
    child in America has a “fundamental right to education.” While
    education is certainly unequal due to local funding, nevertheless
    the fulfillment of that “right” tends to be defined in comparison to
    the latest standards, mandates, and technology – all of which are
    those same marginal-improvement cost drivers. The problem isn’t that
    government controls the construction of infrastructure; it’s that
    it’s no longer possible to build anything by the processes and
    standards of last century. Nor is it all explicit governmental
    mandates or regulations (though much is); social pressures,
    professional standards groups, tort law, construction contracts,
    etc. can all provide pressure to conform to the state of the art.
    But most of those pressures come about in connection with government
    standards one way or the other, even if not literally promulgated in
    the Federal Register.

    What you would expect, if the low-hanging fruit explanation is
    correct, is less cost inflation in areas where there is less
    pressure to conform to the current state-of-the-art. And lo and
    behold, in areas with less government pressure to standardize, that
    seems to be true. If I want the computer that was state-of-the-art
    from 4 years ago, I can get it dirt cheap. Flip phones are
    out-competing smart phones in emerging markets like India. I can
    spend $4.50 on “state of the art” toothpaste with dissolved breath
    strips, fluoride, and peroxide whitening, or I can get a basic
    abrasive paste for $0.79 a tube. If you want the crummiest toilet
    paper, you can get it for a quarter the price of Ultra-Quilted
    Mega-Softy Cuddly Bear brand. But the heavier the government
    involvement, the more pressure – direct and indirect – to
    standardize quality. And standardizing quality tends to an upward
    ratchet that bakes in the new state of the art. The new state of the
    art, in turn, is inevitably vastly more expensive for very little
    marginal gain, because we already figured out the basics of how to
    do things in these sectors decades ago.

    TL:DR – We’re accomplished enough now to know how to make marginal
    improvements, and rich enough to spend lots more money on some
    marginal improvements. Normally this is not a big problem because
    the whole spectrum still exists and the priciest options are
    confined to those relatively few buyers willing to pay for them,
    while more price-conscious consumers use the original versions. The
    sectors where there is the most Cost Disease tend to be
    government-dominated, not because government is particularly
    incompetent (or not just) but because government (particularly in
    the U.S.) tends to have an egalitarian, standardizing effect that
    pushes the state-of-the-art to be the new minimum, so that /all/
    consumers end up paying for it.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
181.
    aacbrown says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 1:20 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466774>
    ~new~

    I think there is a major gap in this analysis. Money gets spent. It
    can be spent on education or healthcare or food or something else.
    If it’s invested in a business, the business spends it on stuff.
    Therefore the total cost of everything increases with total income.
    That’s not exactly true every year in an accounting sense, but it’s
    very close to true in terms of long-run trends.

    Therefore, if you apportion costs into fixed categories like
    education, healthcare and food, the average rate of cost increase is
    going to be the increase in income. You can ask why some things,
    like education and healthcare, increase more than other things, like
    food, but not why everything is going up in price.

    One solution is to introduce new categories. People spend more on
    communication in 2017 than they did in 1970, so you could say
    communication costs are skyrocketing. Or you could create new
    categories for streaming video and social apps and Wikipedia and say
    communication costs fell dramatically, and people started to spend
    money on this new category called, say, “network content.”

    I don’t think it makes much sense to evaluate education quality by
    test scores or health care quality by life expectancies. A major
    shift since 1970 is the fraction of mothers of school age children
    who work. That changes the nature of what schools are required to
    do. And most visits to doctors are not to prolong life. They are to
    relieve symptoms, or to hasten recovery, or to get reassurance
    something is not serious. A 60-year-old in 2017 is much healthier
    than a 60-year-old in 1970.

    The cost side is more objective, but in many cases, people are
    paying more, not to buy more education or healthcare, but to get
    them delivered more conveniently, pleasantly, faster with less
    worry. In 1970, you had to go to a physical bank to deposit your
    physical paycheck, and stand in long lines because everyone had to
    go at lunchtime on payday, and the tellers took the same lunch hour
    as office workers. Banks weren’t open evenings or weekends, and
    didn’t have branches in residential areas. There were no cash
    machines. None of that shows up in cost statistics for financial
    services, but the waiting times were a significant cost. People
    spent a lot more time waiting in line in 1970, and filling out
    forms, and dialing telephones, and going to the post office and DMV.

    I don’t say that all this makes up for cost increases, just that you
    can’t get much insight comparing nominal dollar costs to crude
    quality measures.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        baconbacon says:	
        February 13, 2017 at 1:33 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466786>
        ~new~

        Economics isn’t accounting and accounting isn’t economics.

        The price of something increasing generally makes demand go down
        unless supply is restricted. Money has to get spent on something
        is very different from money gets spent on something and so the
        costs of things go up without any improvements in quality.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466774>
182.
    thetitaniumdragon says:	
    February 13, 2017 at 3:52 pm
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466874>
    ~new~

    FYI, “Inflation” isn’t really something you can just “adjust for”.
    The reason for this is that inflation is calculated via bundles of
    goods – basically, you take a bundle of goods in year X, then
    another bundle of goods in year X+1, and you compare the value of
    those goods.

    This works okay for year to year stuff, but it starts getting really
    bad if you compare across larger time spans. For instance, if you
    compare a bottom end 2016 vehicle to a comparable 1990 vehicle,
    you’ll find that “inflation” over that period on the cost of the car
    was only about 20% – an increase from about $10,000 nominal to about
    $12,000 nominal (note that the bottom-run 2016 vehicle has features
    not even available in a lot of 1990 vehicles, and better safety,
    ect. but it was the closest I could get).

    Meanwhile, the average cost of a new car has increased by a lot more
    than that – but are we really comparing apples to apples here when
    we’re comparing cars which got much worse gas mileage, had fewer
    featurs, no AC, ect. to modern vehicles? Probably not, and it
    exaggerates inflation (and is also why wages “appear stagnant” –
    they’re not, they’ve gone up a lot).

    But this all gets ignored and we just treat it all as inflation. As
    it turns out, this (significantly) overestimates inflation, and
    gives us a poor idea about how prices have really changed. Some
    things have gone up quite a bit in price, but if you look at a lot
    of things – TVs, video games, movies (that you buy and take home),
    computers, ect. – they haven’t really changed much in price for
    decades. Meanwhile other things have gone up a lot in that same time
    span but seen significant quality improvements, while others have
    just inflated massively without major gains.

    Note that this really just makes things worse – the things which
    have been rising ridiculously in terms of cost are rising even more
    ridiculously in terms of cost, while many things (TVs, for instance)
    aren’t rising in cost at all. A 24″ TV cost about $170 in 1959 (in
    1959 dollars!) – about the same amount that a 24″ full-color 1080p
    LCD TV costs today.

    —

    Anyway, to answer your questions:

    #8: Nonwage compensation is actually increasing faster than wage
    compensation is. This is a significant factor. However, a lot of
    this is going to health care costs, so really, a lot of it is just
    inflation.

    But I think the real answer is actually the one people don’t like: #2.

    The assumption that markets work is based on a number of factors
    which, frankly, just aren’t true. Most people aren’t even remotely
    rational agents, and while the laws of supply and demand seem
    legitimate, in reality, it only is meaningful if consumers actually
    change their behavior. And while consumers will change their
    behavior in some cases (we saw major changes in driving habits after
    the last spike in oil prices), the reality is that this does not
    appear to happen (or indeed, even be possible) WRT: health care and
    education.

    If someone tells you that it costs $500,000 per room to build a
    hospital, someone else tells you it costs $1 million, and someone
    else $1.5 million, most people will just be like “Well, okay.” How
    do people know how much things should cost? They really don’t in
    most cases; I can’t imagine most people build multiple hospitals.
    And people don’t really shop around for health care; we’re more or
    less told where we’re supposed to go. Education-wise, few people are
    going to change their minds mid-course (and the colleges don’t want
    people to go there for just a year to get their degree, so
    disincentivize such switching), and it is hard to know how good the
    quality of education is somewhere. I went to Vanderbilt; I’ve also
    taken some classes at Oregon State University. In terms of
    upper-level graduate-level classes, there wasn’t much of a
    difference; Vanderbilt was better, but only somewhat – but it
    sounded like while at Vanderbilt, only the very lowest level courses
    were these big faceless lectures, there were a lot more non-intimate
    classes with professors who sucked/didn’t care at OSU.

    There was a signficant difference in student quality, though –
    Vanderbilt’s students were significantly better.

    We also know from studies of parents that most parents don’t really
    know how to make good choices about education – they struggle to
    evaluate the quality of schools. In fact, even highly educated
    people struggle to evaluate the quality of schools – I mean, just
    look at all of our attempts to measure teacher quality and how
    laughably terrible they are. If experts can’t do it, why on Earth
    would we expect parents to be any better at it?

    The idea that education even functions as a market in a meaningful
    way is deeply questionable – if you have almost total blindness as
    to the quality of the product, you only really buy the product a
    very small number of times, and you have little good ability to
    compare products, how can you possibly expect people to know
    quality? I’d imagine that most people think paying more money
    indicates a higher quality education, because more expensive things
    are better.

    And the same is true of health care.

    —

    Incidentally, the subway costs thing is actually something more
    complicated: it has to do with regulations and rising prices of
    property. This *is* a problem which can be fixed by deregulation, at
    least to some extent, though it might require some actual regulation
    as well to try and tamp down on some of the crap that happens (i.e.
    ridiculous lawsuits which tie projects up for years).

    The State of Oregon passed a law prohibiting cities from not
    expanding out to their Urban Growth Boundaries – you no longer have
    to vote on it, people can just do shit. People are fighting it tooth
    and nail, in part because it is going to lower housing prices (which
    of course, will devalue their real estate). We really need to be
    more aggressive about causing severe damage to these people.

    Log in to Reply
    <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
    Hide
      *
        onyomi says:	
        February 13, 2017 at 6:13 pm
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#comment-466951>
        ~new~

        Regarding the first point, there are so-called “hedonic
        adjustments,” though I have no opinion on how successful they
        are at capturing the values they claim to measure.

        Log in to Reply
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
        Hide ↑ <#comment-466874>


      Leave a Reply Cancel reply
      </2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/#respond>

You must be logged in
<http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?redirect_to=http%3A%2F%2Fslatestarcodex.com%2F2017%2F02%2F09%2Fconsiderations-on-cost-disease%2F>
to post a comment.

////

  *


          Blogroll

  *


          Embalmed Ones

      o ANOIEAEIB <http://blog.jaibot.com/>
      o Common Sense Atheism <http://commonsenseatheism.com/>
      o Less Wrong <http://lesswrong.com>
      o The Last Psychiatrist <http://thelastpsychiatrist.com/>
  *


          Fabulous Ones

      o Alicornutopia <http://alicorn.elcenia.com/board/index.php>
      o Unsong <http://unsongbook.com>
      o Worm <https://parahumans.wordpress.com/>
  *


          Innumerable Ones

      o Gwern <https://www.gwern.net/>
      o n-Category Cafe <https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/>
      o Put A Number On It <http://putanumonit.com/>
      o Random Critical Analysis
        <https://randomcriticalanalysis.wordpress.com>
      o Shtetl-Optimized <http://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/>
      o Statistical Modeling <http://andrewgelman.com/>
      o Unenumerated <http://unenumerated.blogspot.com/>
  *


          Mermaids

      o MIRI <https://intelligence.org/blog/>
      o Miri <http://freethoughtblogs.com/brutereason/>
      o Nothing Is Mere <http://nothingismere.com/>
      o The Merely Real <https://themerelyreal.wordpress.com/>
  *


          Stray Dogs

      o Anonymous Mugwump <http://anonymousmugwump.blogspot.co.uk>
      o Follow The Squirrel <http://followthesquirrel.blogspot.com/>
      o Marginal Revolution <http://marginalrevolution.com/>
      o Nintil <https://nintil.com/>
      o Pseudoerasmus <https://pseudoerasmus.com/>
      o The Money Illusion <http://www.themoneyillusion.com/>
  *


          Suckling Pigs

      o Fredrik deBoer <http://fredrikdeboer.com/blog/>
      o Unqualified Restaurant Reservations
        <http://unqualifiedrestaurants.tumblr.com/>
      o Whole Health Source <http://wholehealthsource.blogspot.com/>
  *


          Those Drawn With A Very Fine Camel Hair Brush

      o Saturday Morning Breakfast Cereal <http://www.smbc-comics.com/>
  *


          Those That Are Included In This Classification

      o #slatestarcodex
        <http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=slatestarcodex>
      o r/slatestarcodex <https://www.reddit.com/r/slatestarcodex/>
  *


          Those That Are Trained

      o 80000 Hours Blog <https://80000hours.org/blog/>
      o Effective Altruism Forum <http://www.effective-altruism.com/>
      o GiveWell Blog <http://blog.givewell.org/>
      o Jeff Kaufman <http://www.jefftk.com/index>
      o Luke Muehlhauser <http://lukemuehlhauser.com/>
      o The Unit of Caring <http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/>
      o The Whole Sky <https://thewholesky.wordpress.com/>
  *


          Those That At A Distance Resemble Flies

      o Agenty Duck <http://agentyduck.blogspot.com/>
      o Beeminder <https://www.beeminder.com/>
      o Nate Soares <http://mindingourway.com/>
  *


          Those That Belong To The Emperor

      o The Future Primaeval <http://thefutureprimaeval.net/>
      o West Hunter <https://westhunt.wordpress.com/>
      o Xenosystems <http://www.xenosystems.net/>
  *


          Those That Have Just Broken The Flower Vase

      o Armed and Dangerous <http://esr.ibiblio.org/>
      o Bryan Caplan <http://econlog.econlib.org/authorbcaplan.html>
      o David Friedman <http://daviddfriedman.blogspot.com/>
      o Don't Worry About The Vase <https://thezvi.wordpress.com/>
      o Overcoming Bias <http://www.overcomingbias.com/>
      o Popehat <http://www.popehat.com/>
  *


          Those That Tremble As Though They Are Mad

      o 1 Boring Old Man <http://1boringoldman.com/>
      o Aceso Under Glass <http://acesounderglass.com/>
      o Cognition and Evolution <http://cognitionandevolution.blogspot.com/>
      o Crazy Meds <http://www.crazymeds.us/>
      o Gruntled and Hinged <http://gruntledandhinged.wordpress.com/>
      o Real Psychiatry <http://real-psychiatry.blogspot.com/>
      o Shrink Rap <http://psychiatrist-blog.blogspot.com/>
  *


          Various Others

      o An Algorithmic Lucidity <http://zackmdavis.net/blog/>
      o Gene Expression <http://www.unz.com/gnxp/>
      o Information Processing <http://infoproc.blogspot.com/>
      o Melting Asphalt <http://www.meltingasphalt.com/>
      o Meteuphoric <https://meteuphoric.wordpress.com/>
      o Otium <https://srconstantin.wordpress.com/>
      o Ribbonfarm <http://www.ribbonfarm.com/>
      o The Rationalist Conspiracy <http://rationalconspiracy.com/>
      o The Sideways View <https://sideways-view.com/>
      o Thing of Things <http://thingofthings.wordpress.com/>
      o Weird Sun Blog <https://weird.solar>
  *


          Archives

      o February 2017 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/>
      o January 2017 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/01/>
      o December 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/12/>
      o November 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/11/>
      o October 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/10/>
      o September 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/09/>
      o August 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/08/>
      o July 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/07/>
      o June 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/06/>
      o May 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/05/>
      o April 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/04/>
      o March 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/03/>
      o February 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/02/>
      o January 2016 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/01/>
      o December 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/12/>
      o November 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/11/>
      o October 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/10/>
      o September 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/09/>
      o August 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/08/>
      o July 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/07/>
      o June 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/06/>
      o May 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/05/>
      o April 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/04/>
      o March 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/03/>
      o February 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/02/>
      o January 2015 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2015/01/>
      o December 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/12/>
      o November 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/11/>
      o October 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/10/>
      o September 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/09/>
      o August 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/08/>
      o July 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/07/>
      o June 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/06/>
      o May 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/05/>
      o April 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/04/>
      o March 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/03/>
      o February 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/02/>
      o January 2014 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/01/>
      o December 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/12/>
      o November 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/11/>
      o October 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/10/>
      o September 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/09/>
      o August 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/08/>
      o July 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/07/>
      o June 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/06/>
      o May 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/05/>
      o April 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/04/>
      o March 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/03/>
      o February 2013 <http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/02/>
  *
      o Full Archives <http://slatestarcodex.com/archives/>

////

  *


          Meta

      o Register <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php?action=register>
      o Log in <http://slatestarcodex.com/wp-login.php>
      o Entries RSS <http://slatestarcodex.com/feed/>
      o Comments RSS <http://slatestarcodex.com/comments/feed/>
      o WordPress.org <https://wordpress.org/>
  *


          Subscribe via Email

    Email Address

  *


          Recent Posts

      o OT69: The Open Of Akhnai
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/12/ot69-the-open-of-akhnai/>
      o Considerations On Cost Disease
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/09/considerations-on-cost-disease/>

      o Albion’s Seed, Genotyped
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/08/albions-seed-genotyped/>
      o Open Thread 68.75
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/08/open-thread-68-75/>
      o Notes From The Asilomar Conference On Beneficial AI
        <http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/02/06/notes-from-the-asilomar-conference-on-beneficial-ai/>

  *
    Search for:

  *

    <https://www.patreon.com/user?u=926060&ty=h>

    Support this blog by donating through Patreon
    <https://www.patreon.com/user?u=926060&ty=h>.

    <https://www.beeminder.com/>

    Beeminder's an evidence-based willpower augmention tool that
    collects quantifiable data about your life, then helps you organize
    it into commitment mechanisms so you can keep resolutions. They've
    also got a blog about what they're doing here
    <http://blog.beeminder.com/tag/rationality/>

    <http://www.mealsquares.com/>

    MealSquares is a "nutritionally complete" food that contains a
    balanced diet worth of nutrients in a few tasty easily measurable
    units. Think Soylent, except zero preparation, made with natural
    ingredients, and looks/tastes a lot like an ordinary scone.

    <http://effectivealtruism.org/?refer=ssc>

    The Effective Altruism newsletter
    <http://effectivealtruism.org/?refer=ssc> provides monthly updates
    on the highest-impact ways to do good and help others.

    <http://rationality.org/workshops/upcoming?referer=slatestarcodex>

    The Center for Applied Rationality conducts workshops which use
    cognitive science to teach people to achieve their goals more
    effectively. You can find a self-assessment of some of their results
    here <http://www.rationality.org/studies/2015-longitudinal-study>.

    <http://triplebyte.com/?ref=slatestarcodex>

    Triplebyte <http://triplebyte.com/?ref=slatestarcodex> is building
    an objective and empirically validated software engineering
    recruitment process. We don’t look at resumes, we just look at
    whether you can code. We’ve had great success helping Slate Star
    Codex readers get jobs in the past. We invite you to test your
    skills and try our process!

    <http://book.80000hours.org/>

    80,000 Hours is a group that helps people interested in helping the
    world decide on a career path. Their new (free) book
    <http://book.80000hours.org/> provides evidence-based advice for how
    to find and make the most out of an altruistic career.

    <http://qualia.com/jobs.html>

    Qualia builds software for the title and escrow industry, which we
    chose to maximize our comparative advantage and capitalize on
    information inefficiency. We're growing fast and are looking for
    full-stack engineers and quantitative operations hires. Email
    jobs@qualia.com <mailto:jobs@qualia.com> for more information.

    <https://www.givingwhatwecan.org/?refer=ssc>

    Giving What We Can <https://www.givingwhatwecan.org/> is a
    charitable movement promoting giving some of your money to the
    developing world or other worthy causes. If you're interested in
    this, consider taking their Pledge as a formal and public
    declaration of intent.

Part of Amazon affiliate program </amazon> <http://www.hulozila.com/>
3 comments since
+

  * CecilTheLion 2017-02-13 17:50
  * gin-and-whiskey 2017-02-13 17:56
  * onyomi 2017-02-13 18:13

:)
